--- 
title: "The Day Of The Patient"
author: 
- Olive Kobusingye^[Institution 1]
- Olive2^[Institution 2 \copyright]
date: "`r Sys.Date()`"
output: pdf_document
description: This is a minimal example of using the bookdown package to write a book.
  The output format for this example is bookdown::gitbook.
documentclass: github_book
link-citations: yes
bibliography:
- book.bib
site: bookdown::bookdown_site
subtitle: Conversations from PG room
biblio-style: apalike
---

# Preface {-}


>> ~***To the men, women, and children who taught us not just Medicine, but how to be doctors, and how to be patient in the face of much adversity. If we did not leave Mulago a safer and kinder place, it was not for lack of
trying.***~

<!--chapter:end:index.Rmd-->

---
output:
  pdf_document: default
  html_document: default
---
# Glossary {-}

**Anemia**: A distressing condition in which a patient is too poor to
pay a health worker or health facility employee some inducement to speed
up the arrival of a medical service. Patients with mild anemia can pay
small amounts. Severe cases cannot pay anything even when it is evident
that the inability to pay could result in the patient's registration
status changing to ~~impatient~~ ==??inpatient==.

**Cadre** (and good cadre): A person who works for the survival of the
NRM regime. A person who works to dismantle the regime is not a bad
cadre. They are not a cadre at all. The term 'bad cadre' is reserved for
one who has previously been single-minded and unquestioning in pursuit
of regime survival, but who has started to question its intentions.

**Development partner**: This term is used loosely to mean a person or
entity that might provide money to purchase goods or services that
government is mandated to provide. It is the politically correct term to
replace the better understood term, 'donor'. It is also used in
situations where the direction of the resources flow is not obvious,
because while in the majority of cases money to pay for the goods and
services comes from outside into Uganda, in some cases the net flow of
resources is from Uganda to foreign accounts. The partnership does not
have to result in development -- however development is defined - and in
fact some partnerships clearly undermine development.

**Doctor (Ugandan)**: The definition is not in what they studied at
university or necessarily what they do now that they are qualified and
licensed. The real essence of being a Ugandan doctor is found in
intangible qualities such as accepting to be exploited by one's employer
if it benefits a patient (especially if the employer is the government);
ignoring one's personal comfort to prevent a patient from becoming
impatient; staying hungry and sleep deprived in order to treat patients
that got sick because they stayed hungry and sleep deprived for too
long; and such other irresponsible behavior.

**Intern doctor**: The common but inaccurate definition of an intern
doctor is that it is a fresh graduate of a medical school who is working
under the close supervision and instruction of a senior doctor in order
to gain experience before licensure. In Uganda the complete definition
includes the following: willing to work as an unpaid volunteer, but
could from time to time be given a small amount of money as an
allowance, able to work under supervision but to not take it for
granted, able to act as the face of (public) health care, a magician in
a clinical coat with a stethoscope for a wand -- in other words, able to
arrive at correct diagnoses with no lab or imaging support, and to treat
every possible ailment with only a handful of medicines, or none at all.

**From above**: This is not in reference to the ceiling, the sky, or
even heaven. The term is in reference to orders that confound logic, or
contradict normal procedures, that are usually said or assumed to
originate from President Museveni, or people close to him. The 'Above'
has now become an institution, rather than a person. Perhaps the only
institution.

**Launchitis**: a chronic debilitating condition in which the sufferer,
often a high ranking government official, puts the public display of
apparent progress in the place of real development. It is characterized
by the need to launch things -- roads, buildings, documents ... and
because there are not enough launch-worthy things, over time the objects
dwindle in importance to include renovations of old buildings, little
village schools, vehicles, and even pit latrines. The cause of the
condition is unknown but has been associated with the need to retain
political power over long periods in the face of an ailing economy and
increasing societal discontent. Currently, there is no documented cure.
Palliation may include toning down media attention. This condition is
not to be confused with bronchitis, which is the inflammation of the
airway in the respiratory system that conducts air from the windpipe
into the lungs.

**Member of Parliament**: an individual elected to represent a specific
section of the population in the legislative assembly, in Uganda called
the Parliament of Uganda. The parliament constitutes one of the three
arms of government, the other two being the executive and the judiciary.
Members of Parliament are public servants paid from public funds. The
road to Parliament is often an ugly one, characterized by lies, fraud,
bribery, and violence. For months, the parliamentary aspirants abandon
everything, and live in a state of temporary insanity during which they
beg, lie, sing, dance, cry, hug strangers, attend every funeral in the
constituency, and make promises they have neither the means nor the
intention to keep. Some take bank loans and sell family assets for a
chance at Parliament. It is a do-or-die race that leaves families in
ruins. But the day comes when the winners are announced, and in that
instant, the one successful candidate is translated into an Honorable
Member of Parliament. They then become entitled. It is like the lottery,
only much more intense and much more public. Unlike the lottery though,
the 'win' does not come as a lump-sum, but rather, in monthly
instalments, allowances, privileges, and for some, access to bribery
opportunities. Once in Parliament, the Honorable Member does not need to
do anything, and indeed most do not. They do not need to understand the
process of legislation, and they might leave the institution after five
years never having read through or debated any laws^[  In addition to legislation, MPs analyse, and pass (approve) national budgets, play an oversight role by monitoring government (mis)use of funds, represent their constituentsâ€™ views in Parliament, and act as the link between the government and the communities they represent.]

**Middle-income status**: In Uganda the meaning of this term is highly
contested. It has nothing to do with the actual incomes of Ugandans or
the overall productivity of the country. The most prevalent
understanding is a future state of being where Ugandans will live in
bliss, and where every household will have all their material needs met
through some mysterious means not directly related to work. The genesis
of this thinking appears to be linked to programs championed by
President Museveni, such as '*Bonna Bagagawale*' (Operation Wealth
Creation, or wealth for all).

**Patient**: An individual who is unwell, and who is able and willing to
wait forever for medical services to get to them. Occasionally such
individuals slip into eternity before the services come, and in these
cases the person's registration status is updated to 'impatient'.

**PG Room**: Postgraduate students' room.

**Pigs**: These are not animals. They have no relation to your source of
pork. When used by President Museveni the word means people in political
opposition.

**Public private partnership**: An official but illegal avenue through
which public money is channeled into the private purse of someone in
government or someone with close connections to certain families.
Occasionally the arrangement is clothed in legal garments through
special approvals.

**Scan**. This does not mean to look briefly at the patient. It does not
mean running one's eye over the patient's medical record or lab results
either. It means a procedure that enables health workers to visualize
internal organs or processes on a monitor or screen that is connected
either directly or remotely to a sensor placed on or in the patient's
body. CT Scans are not so named because of being available in the city,
and there are no Rural Scans by implication. (Computed Tomography comes
from the usage of the old Greek word '*tomos*', which means to cut into
slices. The technology involves the generation of images in form of very
thin slices of the body part under study).

**Stakeholder:** This word should be removed from the dictionary. It
does not add any value to the language, as it means everyone and no one.
At some point in the distant past, it might have meant people that have
a stake in the matter under discussion, such as patients having a stake
in a hospital, or a financier having a stake in the project they have
financed. Over time the stakes became lower and the ring of inclusion
for those that hold the stakes expanded to the point where all Ugandans
have a stake in everything that happens within the borders of the
country; but also all other people that might have visited Uganda,
financed projects here, or any that might consider visiting in the
future, are also allowed to have a stake.

**The sink test**: This is a special lab procedure that is particularly
handy on Friday afternoons, public holidays, and weekends. Samples
brought to the lab during these times will be subjected to this test,
which involves the sample or specimen being discarded without further
processing. The results will be sufficiently vague, leading the
discerning doctor to repeat the request during more acceptable hours.

## How to read this book. {-}

Conversations from PG room are not recounts of actual conversations.
They do reflect sentiments of actual doctors, and they discuss actual
events and real patient encounters, either experienced by the author and
her colleagues over the years, or shared with the author by doctors in
more recent times. Where facts about specific contexts are important in
understanding the conversations, those facts are presented in text
boxes, and references are provided. The doctors in PG rooms may bear
similarities to doctors in those periods and times, but the identities
have been changed for their comfort.

The author conducted extensive interviews with many of the people who
feature in this book. The following persons were interviewed, and the
quotes attributed to them are their actual words.

Dr. Adam Kimala

Dr. Anthony Gakwaya

Dr. Francis Mutyaba

Dr. Henry Ddungu

Dr. Jackie Mabweijano

Dr. Robert Wangoda

Prof. Francis Omaswa

Prof. Moses Galukande

Prof. Nelson Sewankambo

Prof. Paul D'Arbela

Prof. Richard Kanyerezi

Prof. Sam Luboga

Prof. Sarah Kiguli

Prof. Steven Kijjambu

Historical sources have been used to reconstruct conversations in some
instances, and the sources have been cited where possible. Unattributed
sentiments and conclusions are entirely those of the author.

>>~***'Medicine is a social science and politics is nothing else but medicine
on a large scale.' Rudolf Karl Ludwig Virchow, nineteenth-century German
physician (1821-1902).***~

Karungi swung her bag over the shoulder and looked around the room one
more time. The bag contained items that had been her faithful companions
the last few years. A clinical coat, a well used stethoscope, patella
hammer, a coffee mug from a conference a few years back, and a digital
pointer for use in presentations. On second thoughts she took the
pointer out and placed it on the table, next to the room key. One always
inherited stuff from PG room alumni. Best to leave that for someone
else. She opened the door, stood for a short while in the entrance to
get accustomed to the darkness outside, and then she closed the door
firmly behind her. It felt like leaving home. Karungi walked past the
building that once housed the physiology lab, and that was now home to
the newly created School of Biomedical Sciences. On the upper side of
the uneven dirt path was a couple of old buildings -- the smaller of the
two had been an animal house back in the days when live animals were
used in research at the medical school. The last batch of guinea pigs
was eaten during the Idi Amin war in 1979, and the monkeys were set free
for lack of food. The house now served as offices for the Department of
Community Medicine. The bigger building housed the department of
anatomy, with the famous cadaver room on the second floor, as well as
histology labs and a lecture theatre. Across the parking lot on the far
end was the Albert Cook Library. Karungi walked through the poorly lit
parking lot down to the road that divided Mulago Hospital from the
medical school, leaving the Infectious Diseases Institute to the right
and Davies Lecture Theatre to the left. At the security booth that stood
guard to the hospital's administration block, she took the winding road
that gave the most direct access to the Accident & Emergency Department
on Level 3 of Mulago National Referral Hospital. To the right of the
security booth was a rail that ran along the lower edge of the road
dividing the medical school from the hospital. The rail was a key
fixture in the life of medical students. Generations of students and
doctors studying and working in Mulago had paid scant attention to the
distinction between Mulago Hospital and Makerere Medical School,
treating the institutions as one and the same. But lately there had been
talk of separating the decades-old Siamese twins. The surgeons were
already lining up the scalpels.


\[*insert historical map of Mulago from Lancet*\]

In June 1945 a committee set up by the Colonial Office in London, known
as the Asquith Commission, tabled their report regarding medical
training in Uganda. The report recommended that a 1000 bed hospital be
built in Kampala to 'serve the people of Kampala and its environs', and
to act as the teaching hospital for Makerere Medical school. Because of
the huge demand on development resources following the destruction
caused by the World War, the construction was deferred, although a grant
had already been announced under the Colonial Development and Welfare
Act. Construction did not begin until 1958, when all the required
resources were martialed, and the foundation stone laid. By this time
the Old Mulago Hospital facilities were so outstripped by the sheer
numbers of patients that some admitted patients were sleeping on the
verandas. This was phenomenal growth for a facility that started as a
Venereal Disease Hospital in 1913, dealing with gonorrhea and syphilis
which were rampant at the time, and only converted to a general hospital
in 1923. The New Mulago Hospital was opened in October 1962, nearly four
years after the construction started.

# The Sweet & Sour Sixties {-}

> ~***'Makerere, Makerere, We build for the future,Â The Great Makerere   
Great, Great and Mighty, The walls around thee   
Great, Great and Mighty,   
The gates beside thee.***~

One day he was an ordinary physician at Mulago Hospital, teaching
medical students and seeing an endless stream of patients, the next he
was a cabinet minister with all the trappings that came with the title.
Dr. Emmanuel Lumu, appointed the first Ugandan Minister of Health at
independence, felt like he was wearing someone else's skin. Not that he
was unaccustomed to high society. He had his friend Kabaka Edward Mutesa
to thank for that privilege. The attention he got as a minister though,
was different. Some days he missed his more modest position at the
hospital. As a minister, he had to worry, not about the patients under
his care, but about the entire country's health system with all its
warts and pimples; too many patients for too few hospitals and health
workers, a medical school that was largely dependent on expatriate
staff, Kenya and Tanzania unhappy that Makerere was not producing enough
graduates for the whole region, and threatening to start their own
schools ... and he had no predecessor to turn to for advice. Dr. H. J.
Croot, who had been minister under the colonial government, was unlikely
to be helpful as the conditions of work would be vastly different. He
was grateful to the technical staff at the ministry who pulled together
a few documents to guide his thinking. He quickly put together a team to
draft the national health strategy for the newly independent Uganda.

\*\*\*

The days leading to 9 October, 1962, were memorable to Ugandans for many
reasons. The excitement was palpable. It was akin to the expectation of
the first serious downpour after a long dry spell, only more intense.
One can smell and taste the dust in the dry air. The dark clouds gather.
The winds drive them back and forth. The skies growl. The birds swirl
overhead. One can almost smell the rain. Yet the rain holds off. Then
when the skies cannot contain it any longer, the strands that hold the
water back snap. The rain comes down. The relief is audible.

All across the country the independence storm broke forth with loud
claps of thunder and lightning. While many rural Ugandans did not fully
understand the significance of what was happening in faraway Kampala,
with the lowering of the Union Jack and the triumphant ascension of the
Ugandan flag, as bold and beautiful as the women that danced to the loud
drumming throughout the night, those that had experienced the indignity
and scorn of the colonial master up close knew freedom had come.
Nowhere, perhaps, was the awareness of the difference between colonial
master and servant sharper than within the medical fraternity.

\*\*\*

Nkore worked as a senior clerk at the District Commissioner's office in
Kabale. He had heard a lot about the independence plans. On the morning
of 9 October 1962, just as he was preparing to leave the house, his
pregnant wife quietly announced that the baby might be arriving the same
day. 'Really?', Nkore asked, not quite absorbing the full import of the
information. The wife could tell that his mind was already out there in
the independence frenzy. Besides, what would he do to help even if he
were home? Cane and hat in hand, Nkore was already half out of the door
when he asked if she had alerted the midwife.

'Yes, she is aware.'

'Good', and with that he was gone.

So, while the rest of the country was preoccupied with the independence
preparations and festivities, Mrs. Nkore's one thought was the imminent
arrival of the baby. The friend and self-taught midwife that had helped
her to deliver previous babies was on high alert, and had been for days.
Both women knew it could not be too long now. By midmorning, however,
all discomfort had subsided, and Mrs. Nkore thought she might have
misread the signs. She went about her chores without any sign of labour.
In the evening though, with hardly any warning, her waters broke. In a
couple of hours she gave birth to a bouncing baby girl. Nkore returned
long past midnight to find that the baby had arrived in his absence. 'Of
course the baby must be named 'independence', he exclaimed, as soon as
he heard of the birth. Independence, or Kweetegyeka, in Rukiga. By the
time the baby was a month old, nobody but the father used the whole
name, considered too weighty for a tiny little baby. Everybody else
called her Kweete.

On 16 October 1962, the New Mulago Hospital opened its doors amidst
pomp and fanfare. To do the honors was Queen Elizabeth's cousin, Her
Royal Highness the Duchess of Kent. Alderdice, a former Medical
Superintendent of (the old) Mulago hospital, writing in the *Lancet* of
August 1963, said this of the new hospital, 'A 900-bed hospital has been
constructed in Kampala, Uganda, of a standard that compares favourably
with teaching hospitals of recent design elsewhere.' With regard to the
medical school, he was equally full of praise. 'Throughout the course,
standards obtaining in the best British medical schools apply. ...
Library facilities for students and staff are of a very high standard.
The Albert Cook library has the best collection in East Africa and very
few journals to which a member of staff may wish to refer are not
available.'

\*\*\*

> > ~***At Mulago the intention was to build a 750-bed general hospital (to
which was later added a private wing of 130 beds). Once the figure of Â£2
million for the building, Â£220,000 for medical equipment, and Â£80,000
for an extension to the nurses' home was arrived at and voted by
Parliament, the architect and the planning committee were determined to
cut their cloth accordingly. Although experience elsewhere in Africa
raised serious doubts about the adequacy of the money voted, the
hospital was in fact completed and equipped virtually within this
figure. ...***~

> > ~***Two factors helped to keep the costs within bounds. The first and more
important was the speed with which the hospital was designed and
building started: the whole project from the first sketch to completion
took less than five years; and this gave less time for prices to rise.
The second was the determination of the architect (who controlled
expenditure and held the vote book) and the planning committee to keep
within the figure set, even though this meant a good deal of give and
take.***~

> > ~***[@alderdice1963]***~

Dr. Lumu had a premonition that the cabinet meeting he was going to
attend at State House would not end well. He nonetheless prepared a
technical brief about the plans for the new regional hospitals in case
he had to give an update. Driving through Entebbe town, he noticed that
there was unusually tight security. A bigger surprise awaited him at
State House. He arrived to find that rather than the usual cabinet
meeting, there were only three other ministers waiting to meet the
president: Mathias Ngobi, G.B.K Magezi, and Grace Ibingira. A fifth
minister, Balaki Kirya, arrived shortly afterwards. Beyond the brief
greetings, nobody spoke. Every man sat quietly with his own thoughts.
Obote was seated in his usual spot. Sam Odaka, his ADC, was the only
other person in the room. A soldier came into the room, and Obote asked
the ministers to follow him. At the door they were met by soldiers who
led them to a waiting van. Some seven hours later they were ushered into
Patiko prison in Gulu, and later transferred to Kotido in Karamoja where
they were imprisoned without trial. Seated in a remote prison in
Karamoja, Dr. Lumu could not have felt more removed from his patients
and students at Mulago.

\*\*\*

The operating rooms on the ground floor of Uganda's largest and most
prestigious hospital were abuzz with activity. Thursday was the main
theatre day for Red Firm, and Dr. Sebastian Kyalwazi who had returned
from Britain a year earlier had a long list of patients lined up for
surgery. It was said that he had been among the top students in the
exams that saw him becoming a Member of the Royal College of Surgeons of
Edinburg. For many of the junior staff that was wonderful news, but it
came with a fair amount of confusion. Was he now to be treated the way
they treated Prof. Ian McAdam? Was he going to have special theatre
gowns with his name on them? Up until that time only the white doctors
had personalized gowns. The easy bit was his joining the white doctors
in the surgeons' room, but these other privileges were still somewhat
unclear. In that exclusive club Kyalwazi would soon be joined by another
British trained Ugandan surgeon, Alexander Odonga.

In truth Kyalwazi and Odonga did not have to be as good as their British
counterparts to attain membership to the Royal College of Surgeons. They
had to be much better, in order to be considered as good. The door to
the surgeons' room was very narrow indeed for the so-called natives, and
the Ugandans that got in during those early days were resilient and
especially brilliant. The struggle for equal professional recognition
went as far back as the late thirties, in fact for as long as the
Africans had a role in 'modern' medical care other than that of being
the patient.

Kyalwazi pushed through the main double-door entrance to the theatre and
made an immediate left turn into the surgeons' changing room. Here the
doctors would exchange their street clothes and clinical coats for
special gowns, usually used only here. In a couple of minutes he had
changed, and he exited the changing rooms directly into the main
corridor within the theatre. There were six spacious operating rooms,
each separated from the next by scrubbing bays, equipment storage, and
trolley preparation space. Inside each theatre was a new operating table
with special overhead lighting that incorporated a camera for televising
operations. On one wall was a board on which the instrument nurse would
record all the instruments on the trolley, and the number of mops and
towels at the team's disposal. At the end of each procedure the nurse
would do a loud count to be sure that no instruments or swabs were left
in the wound. On the other wall was an X-ray viewer that allowed the
surgical team to display any X-ray films that might be needed for the
procedure. All theatres were fitted with piped oxygen and suction
facilities.

Kyalwazi checked the board in the surgeon's room to confirm what theatre
he had been assigned, and then made his way down to Theatre 2. The
anesthetist was busy securing an intravenous line on the first patient.
'*Maama, wasuze bulungi*?', he asked the patient. 'How was your night?'
He always made a point to talk to the patients before they were put to
sleep.

\*\*\*

Karungi's earliest memory of Kweete was at a family gathering. It might
have been a wedding or a funeral. They could not have been older than
seven years. All the kids were running around, and Aunt Adrine reminded
them repeatedly that Kweete was not to run too fast or she would end up
in the hospital. Kweete looked just fine to the other kids and so the
warning fell on deaf ears. In a sea of children of all ages, three
little girls were inseparable: Karungi, Biitu, and Kweete. Like Kweete,
Biitu's full name was rarely used and hardly remembered. Few would have
made the connection between it and the English royal name Beatrice.
While Karungi and Kweete were first cousins, Biitu's family was from a
different clan, although their homesteads were only a stone-throw apart.
During the school holidays Biitu would sometimes arrive at her friend's
home early enough for breakfast, and she might not return to her own
home until after supper. The parents had long stopped the threats and
beatings that they had used to try to keep her away from Kweete and
Karungi, who Biitu called Rungi. The parents should not have worried
though. The only mischief the girls ever got into, if it was that, was
to climb every fruit tree on the property. Otherwise, they usually spent
the days playing hide and seek, '*kwepena*', marble games using riverbed
stones, and hunting for guavas and other fruits. It was later, when the
girls were nearly ten that Kweete became critically ill, and had to
spend nearly two months in hospital. The doctors determined that she had
an infection involving the inner lining of her heart, on top of the
asthma that had bothered her episodically since she was about four.
Because she missed the most critical term of the school year, she had to
redo the class, falling behind her peers by a whole year. For Karungi
the following holiday was not much fun as Kweete could not climb trees,
did not want to run around, and she absolutely could not play in the
rain. These restrictions were to remain for the next several years. The
following year Karungi's parents sent her off to boarding school, so her
contact with her two soul mates was further curtailed.

With Rungi gone to boarding school and Kweete not well enough to join
her in their usual escapades, Biitu now had no choice but to take on the
chores and tasks that her mother insisted were essential for every
girl's survival. She was taught how to peel *matoke* perfectly without
looking, how to winnow and grind millet, and how to take care of little
babies. Her mother told her this was the meaningful education, not the
reading of books that had little to do with real life. Without Rungi and
Kweete life was dull but not lacking in activity.

\*\*\*

In the evening of 19 December 1969, Professor Ian MacAdam, the Head of
Department of Surgery, was just exiting the hospital when he heard on
the car radio that President Obote had been shot at while leaving Lugogo
sports stadium, where he had just closed the UPC annual delegates'
convention. Usually by this time MacAdam would already be at the club,
but on Fridays he sometimes did an evening round to especially make sure
the post-operative patients were comfortable, and to preempt calls late
in the night. As he swung his car into Kira Road to head towards Mulago
roundabout and on to the doctors' club, he saw a convoy speeding towards
the hospital entrance from the opposite direction, sirens blaring. His
sixth sense told him to turn around and head back into the hospital. By
the time he made the full turn at the roundabout, the motorcade had
disappeared into the hospital. He returned to the packing that he had
just left on level 3, and entered the hospital through the Casualty
Department. The previously calm waiting area was busy. There were
soldiers and police officers standing around, and although he had taken
the precaution to put on his clinical coat, they would not let him take
the lift. He walked straight through to the main staircase in the
central block, and then ran up to the 6^th^ floor, taking two steps at a
time. As he came up to the landing he was met by the 6^th^ floor Matron
and two younger doctors.

'We have been trying to reach you', the Matron said, visibly relieved to
see him.

'I heard the news on the radio. I was just leaving so I turned and came
back.'

'This way please. He is in Room 1.' Room 1 on Ward 6B was the top VIP
room. The entire floor had been cordoned off, and for the duration of
the President's stay there were no other admissions to the ward. There
were soldiers at the entrance, and the elevators were closely guarded.

Dr. Kyalwazi arrived shortly afterwards. The two surgeons reviewed the
patient and ordered that he be taken to the theatre immediately. They
then called Dr. Martin Aliker, the ENT surgeon, to join them in theatre.

The stories from Lugogo were as varied and numerous as the people
willing to tell them. Some said an assassin had taken a shot at the
president as he emerged from the hall, but that the split second before
he pulled the trigger, a super-alert Obote had spotted him and dived to
the ground, which was how he survived. The bullets that followed,
according this version of the story, were by his security as they both
covered him and tried to take out the assassin. Others swore that Mr.
President had really not survived a bullet, but had had a little too
much to drink. They argued that any bullet that knocked out his teeth
and injured his tongue would have ripped through his brain, or at the
very least shattered the jaw. As it was, the news from the hospital was
that the President was safe and stable. Obote himself insisted later
that someone tried to kill him, and that he got broken teeth and a rent
in the tongue from the gunshot. Over time the stories were laundered in
bleach and dyed every color of the rainbow, so it was impossible to know
what really happened. What was remarkable though, was that the head of
state was rushed to Mulago, which at that time was synonymous with the
highest level of medical care in the country, and probably in the
region. The time for presidents to move with their own emergency medical
teams complete with an operating theatre on wheels, as was rumored to be
the case with a later administration, and for evacuations to European
capitals on the first sign of a medical ailment, was yet to come.

# The Scary Seventies {-}


> > ~***From East and West,Â From North and South***~

> > ~***All voices singing,Â Arise Makerere    
Rise up and rise,Â High up and high    
All voices singing  
Arise Makerere  ***~

Dr. Lumu's plan had stipulated that a 600-bed hospital would be
constructed in each of the four regional headquarters; Mbale, Gulu, Fort
Portal, and Masaka. Another 600-bed hospital was to be built in Kampala
to relieve Mulago of congestion, and to allow the national referral
hospital to serve its main functions of referral, teaching and research.
The Amin presidency heralded uncertainty that escalated rapidly. In
1972, he expelled all the Asian doctors, creating a huge void in the
capacity of the hospital and the medical school, literally overnight. A
number of senior European doctors left shortly after in protest of the
treatment meted out to their Asian colleagues. The heads of department
of Surgery, Obstetrics and Gynecology, and Internal Medicine resigned
and left in the same week. Amin's ministers of health, first Dr. Justin
Gesa, and later Henry Kyemba, seemed to have been spinning around Amin's
insanely unpredictable plans and demands that any serious intentions for
the construction of the hospitals fell by the wayside. Despite the
extreme violence that engulfed all professionals, Amin singled out the
doctors and judges for unexpected favors. He gave senior consultants
Mercedes Benzes, and other doctors got cars as well. As the
self-declared economic war intensified and common commodities
disappeared from the market, Amin created a special outlet for doctors
in Industrial Area. From here doctors would be allocated sugar, bear,
salt, and rice at very low prices. Most doctors would turn around the
sell the items to supplement their meagre incomes. Likewise, Amin had a
fuel pump installed in Old Mulago close to the Polio Hostel for the
exclusive use of doctors.

\*\*\*

Dr. Mande, a Makerere Medical School graduate, had joined the Uganda
Army as a young officer. He was attracted to the trappings of a military
officer without the risk of combat. He was not well paid but he had many
privileges that his civilian peers did not have -- a furnished house, a
car, a food allowance, and access to the army shop where he could buy
commodities such as wine and whisky that were not readily available on
the market. And for all that, the most he had to do was examine
recruits, and treat minor ailments at the army clinic. His prescriptions
consisted mostly of malaria medicines, and tetracycline and penicillin
for sheepish young soldiers coming from weekends off duty. Life was not
perfect but he was not complaining. The military coup had not brought
any change to his personal circumstances. Then things started to change.
First, he was singled out during an officers' meeting as being the
doctor. 'Eh. *Daktari?*' the President had half asked, half stated, as
though this was a curiosity. Mande preferred to stay unnoticed. Then he
started being called out to attend to patients whose injuries did not
look accidental. Multiple fractures, black eyes, bruises all over the
body, even burns. He saw most of these patients only once and never
asked what happened to them after his one-off treatment sessions. He had
to certify deaths whose causes were clearly unnatural. He was already
sleeping poorly and having nightmares when the Commandant called him to
his office and notified him that there were going to be executions, and
that he would be required to certify that the men to be executed were in
good health. Executions! His heart did a somersault and then started
racing. He felt sick. He had not become a doctor to do this. Besides, if
these men were going to be killed, what did it matter whether they had
tuberculosis, gonorrhea, or were in perfect health? And once they were
shot, why could the men assigned to do the deed not confirm for
themselves that their mission had been accomplished? After all, Ugandans
were being killed and buried every day without requiring that a doctor
confirm their demise. But Mande had been in the army long enough to know
that you did not question orders. He listened attentively, gave the
required salute, and walked out of the Commandant's office with his
stomach churning, and his tongue stuck to the roof of his dry mouth. A
few years previously, an army officer that he knew well had been
executed in Mbale. He had been tried by an army tribunal and found
guilty of being a FRONASA^[The Front for National Salvation (FRONASA) was a Ugandan rebel group formed by Yoweri Museveni in 1972. It was one of the 28 groups represented in a meeting in Moshi, Tanzania between 24 to 26 March 1979 in what would become known as the Moshi Conference. That meeting formed the Uganda National Liberation Front (UNLF) and its military wing the Uganda National Liberation Army (UNLA), to fight alongside Tanzanian forces against Idi Amin. UNLA and Tanzanian forces in the Ugandaâ€“Tanzania War led to the overthrow of Idi Amin's regime.] collaborator. Masaba had been a pleasant
guy, and he and Mande had played darts together a few times. His
execution had left Mande quite depressed for some time.

\*\*\*

Kweete was giddy with excitement at the prospect of traveling to
Kampala. She had heard her father talk about the city, but she never
imagined that she would one day see it with her own eyes. She and her
brother Kwesiga, who everybody called Kwesi, often played games in which
they were going to Kampala, and coming back with lots of goodies that
they imagined were free for the taking once one got to the city.
Kweete's cousin Karungi had been to Kampala. She traveled with her
mother to her sister's wedding, at which she was a bridesmaid. When she
returned Kweete and Biitu were waiting to hear all about the city. They
were disappointed. Karungi told them that they stayed in a place called
Bukoto, and that her aunt's house was a flat. That was confusing -- how
was a house a flat? Then the wedding happened at a big church, and the
reception was at a big hotel near the church. Biitu wanted to know if
she saw the President's house. She had not. Did she see the TV house?
No. Did she see Lake Victoria? No. Biitu quickly concluded that
Karungi's Kampala visit did not count. Now Kweete was about to go there,
and she intended to make her visit count.

Kweete had been to Kisizi Hopsital for her routine review, and the white
doctor who examined her talked to her father at length afterwards.
Kweete did not understand most of what was said as the white man's
speech was hard to follow, but from what she could piece together, the
doctors at Mulago Hospital in Kampala had come up with new ways of
treating heart diseases such as she had. Kweete had waited for them to
leave the hospital, but on the way home she could not contain her
curiosity any longer.

'Father, what did the *Mzungu* say?'

'He thinks you are doing well. He has said that you should carry on with
the medicines that you have been taking.'

'Is that all?'

'He mentioned that there is a group of doctors in Mulago who are working
very hard to find better ways of treating heart diseases. He thought it
might be good idea for them to examine you as well.'

'So are we going there?'

'Not right away. I need to discuss it with your mother, and to take
leave from work to be able to take you. The doctor said it is not
urgent, but if and when we do decide to go he will give us a letter to
the doctors in Mulago.'

Kweete had to be content with that, not knowing if they would ever go.
That had been months ago. Then one night the father came home and
announced that he and Kweete would be traveling to Kampala in the
morning. He had the letter from the hospital, and as it happened, the
hospital van was due to pick up supplies from Kampala, so they had
offered to take them to Mulago on the same trip. Everything happened so
fast. Kweete had no opportunity to tell her friends that she was going
to Kampala. They would be so envious! Only Kwesi was there to wish he
was going.

The Medical Outpatient Clinics at Mulago were located on the 4^th^ floor
of the hospital's front wing. There was a pharmacy at the entrance, and
there were labs on site to do most of the basic tests needed by the
doctors. Patients who did not need imaging could come in for care and
leave without needing to get farther into the hospital. All the
consultation rooms were designed with wide glass windows overlooking the
car park, and the sun and fresh air made this a pleasant place to work,
even considering that it was a hospital. Sr. Imelda Atim kept a very
orderly clinic. Dr. Kibuuka-Musoke liked to know as soon as he came in
how many patients were booked, and if they had the latest lab results on
file. He usually saw the new patients first, especially if they were
referrals from upcountry. The child from Kabale was the first in line.

Eight o'clock came and went, as did 9 o'clock. This was unusual for Dr.
Kibuuka-Musoke to not be at the clinic on time, and more unusual still
that he had not communicated about his absence. On the few occasions
when he was unable to run the clinic, he let the clinic know who would
see his patients. At 9.30 am Atim called the doctor's office, and the
telephone went unanswered. Atim walked to the Department of Medicine on
the same floor and asked the Department secretary if she had seen Dr.
Kibuuka-Musoke. 'No. I have not seen him this morning. You may want to
check with Dr. D'Arbela in case he is teaching somewhere.'

'He would have let us know. And I noticed his car is not at its usual
spot. It seems like he has not come to the hospital at all. Could you
please check if someone else has been assigned to see the patients. We
have a full clinic.'

It had been only three months since Kibuuka-Musoke took over the
headship of the department from Dr. Bill Saunders who had retired in
December 1972. By the following day, rumour had it that Dr.
Kibuuka-Musoke had left the country. Within a few weeks he was replaced
by Dr. Paul D'Arbela, a physician with specialization in diseases of the
heart, and one that had made major contributions to the training of
specialist doctors at Makerere. Kibuuka-Musoke's departure was by no
means unique. Some doctors walked off ward rounds to go to the bathroom,
and did not return for decades, if ever. The less lucky were picked up
by the State Research Bureau agents never to be seen again.

Dr. D'Arbela's succeeding Kibuuka-Musoke as department head was the easy
part. The more difficult assignment proved to be that of personal
physician to the Head of State, Field Marshal Idi Amin Dada. Very early
on in that role D'Arbela found out that his predecessor's woes had
stemmed from his attempt to monitor and treat the President's gout
problems. The request for repeated urine samples worried Amin. He feared
that he was being poisoned through the urine. Too paranoid to place his
health in the hands of one doctor, a Muganda at that, Amin had secured
the services of an Egyptian doctor on the side. With this knowledge,
D'Arbela played it very safe. He made all his prescriptions sound like
mere suggestions, knowing that Amin would discuss them with the Egyptian
physician, who would very likely issue the same instructions D'Arbela
would have given. With this delicate triangular relationship between
suspicious patient, cautious doctor, and trusted expatriate back-up,
D'Arbela was able to survive Amin's presidency. His unceremonious exit
would come later through a different avenue. For the moment, his biggest
preoccupation was how to maintain and even expand the teaching and
medical services despite the continuing exodus of highly trained staff.

'Kibuuka Musoke had taken over as acting Department Head from Bill
Parson who left in the first wave of departures after Amin expelled the
Asians. When Kibuuka Musoke left, I was asked to head the department.
The Master of Medicine program had been started under Parson, and we had
to sustain it. Olweny and Kiire were among the first batch from that
program. I quickly assigned the promising young doctors to various
specialties -- Otim to endocrinology, Batambuze to cardiology, Mugerwa
... We ensured that there was succession and continuity of the programs.
It was the Masters of Medicine programs that saved the medical school
from collapse.'

\*\*\*

If the hospital suffered a shortage of doctors, the Medical School was
probably even more acutely affected. The biomedical sciences of anatomy,
physiology and biochemistry were practically depleted of senior staff.
Lab technicians were in some instances taking on the roles of the
teaching staff. Despite the shortages of senior personnel, the medical
school was keeping up with the scientific discoveries elsewhere. Anthony
Gakwaya, an undergraduate in the early seventies, recalled that the
class spent almost an entire year in the biochemistry class discussing
the DNA structure which had been discovered by James Watson and Francis
Crick some twenty years earlier. Gene sequencing was still very topical,
and Frederick Sanger and others were still racing to see who would be
the first to discover a method of rapidly ordering -- sequencing -- the
building blocks of proteins. Ugandan medical students were facing an
uncertain future with few teachers and hardly any lab reagents, but they
were doing what they could to stay in the mainstream of knowledge, if
not in practice. The Albert Cook Library that had enjoyed great
prestige, and that had subscriptions to a wide variety of scientific
journals, could no longer keep up. First there was a slowing down, then
the deliveries stopped altogether.

In a span of a few years student life at Makerere changed from one of
relative luxury to one of great hardship. Where the halls of residence
had been the envy of even the working class around Kampala, now they
were often plunged in darkness from frequent power outages, and water
was erratic. Food quality suffered, and was the cause of a few strikes
in the early Amin years, before it became evident that the problems
facing the nation were far graver than poorly cooked meals. Military
presence on Makerere campus became commonplace, and the insecurity that
had engulfed the rest of the city now extended to the hill that prided
itself in being the seat of independent thinking and academia. The stage
was set for a violent confrontation.

\*\*\*

On the night of 27 June 1976, Dr. Adam Kimala, Provincial Medical
Officer for North Buganda Province, was driving from Mityana to Lugazi
when he ran into a big military convoy at Kibuye. He gave the convoy a
wide berth and continued his journey undisturbed. The following day he
learnt that an Air France plane had been hijacked and landed at Entebbe,
and he thought that might explain the military presence on Entebbe road.
As the situation evolved, most of the hostages were released, except for
some 106 passengers who were either Israelis, or non-Israeli Jews. The
hijackers were trading their lives for the release of terrorists held in
prisons mostly in Israel, but also in some European countries. All this
remained remote to Kimala, whose responsibilities as both the provincial
head of the medical services and the Medical Superintendent of Kawolo
Hospital kept him busy enough. But fate was about to hand Kimala a
strange assignment. As he recounted, 'One morning that week a Police
detective officer from Lugazi called me to say that they had found a
dead body, and I was required to go and do a postmortem. The body was in
a sugar plantation in Namawojolo along Jinja Road. When we got to the
body, I examined it, and noted that it had bullet wounds on the upper
torso, but it was also burnt. There was a burn in some sort of straight
line from the head to the legs, but I could see that it was a short
white female, probably in her sixties or seventies. I quickly came to
the conclusion that this was not a simple murder, and that someone had
shot the woman and wanted to hide her identity, or the mode of her
death, probably both. Given the circumstances, I thought it best to not
make a detailed report. Something told me this body was going to cause
us problems. It was dangerous. I wrote a very short report, and said the
body was burnt beyond recognition. We sent for prisoners from Lugazi
prison and they buried the body right there in the plantation. I gave
the report to the Police officer and went back to the hospital, hoping
that was the end of the matter.'

It was not. In a day or so, news broke that one of the hostages, Dora
Bloch, had been killed, and that her body had been dumped in Namanve.
Kimala began to worry in earnest. He consoled himself that he had not
been near Namanve. He prayed that the Police detective and the prisoners
would keep their mouths shut. He did not have to wait for long to
discover that people could not keep secrets. A few mornings after the
postmortem, Kimala was walking to one of the wards when security
officers came into the hospital. They asked him for the Medical
Superintendent's office. 'I pointed them to my office. As they headed
there, I got into the car, and drove to Bugerere. I told my staff that I
had to supervise work in the Province - Kyaggwe, Bulemeezi, and Mubende.
Three times, the security officers came to my office and did not find
me. They searched my office. They went to my home and asked my wife if
she knew of my whereabouts. They wanted to know if I had brought any
reports home recently. She knew what they were after. She told them that
she had heard me talking of a report that I had deposited at the Police.
They went straight there and they were given the report. One of them
returned and told my wife to let me know that everything was okay, that
I had given a good report. After that they never came back.'

\*\*\*

The date for the execution was set as 9 September 1977. Mande did not
want his wife to be around when he took part in the macabre theatre, so
he devised a way to get her out of town. He suggested that she travel to
the village to see her parents and take her ailing father some medicine.
Mrs. Mande jumped at the offer, pleasantly surprised by her husband's
unexpected generosity. She and their little boy would be gone for a
couple of weeks.

The men to be executed had been tried by an army tribunal and found
guilty of various crimes, including plotting to overthrow the government
of President Idi Amin, being economic saboteurs, and spying. The program
was quite elaborate. The government radio station had aired
announcements of the planned executions, and the public was invited to
come and witness how enemies of the state were punished. On D-day the
prisoners were brought to the Kampala Clock Tower grounds in the Prisons
Department vans. They were blindfolded and frogmarched, each to a
metallic pole set up for the purpose, and they were tied to the poles.
An army officer moved from pole to pole ascertaining that they were all
properly secured. The soldiers to execute the prisoners lined up with
their guns at the ready. The army chaplain was then invited to come and
give the men their final benediction, or whatever spiritual comfort he
could impart in the grim circumstances. At exactly 4 o'clock the officer
in charge of the execution gave the single command to fire, and the
shots were discharged, each prisoner stopping three shots directed to
the head. After that Dr. Mande, who had been in attendance from the
beginning, came forward to confirm that the men were indeed dead. He had
been so anguished by having to participate in the executions that he did
not think through exactly how he was going to confirm the deaths of the
men, shot at close range only moments before. As he approached the poles
he suddenly realized he had no tools, and in the same moment realized
the absurdity of the very thought of tools. One of the bodies was all
but decapitated. He moved from pole to pole barely touching the bodies,
although it occurred to him that he could perhaps try to feel for their
carotid pulses. He was relieved that the men assigned to remove the
bodies were following quickly in his wake, cutting the lifeless bodies
off the poles, and placing them in coffins. Mande did not recall how he
left the Clock Tower grounds. He did not recall who he talked to, if
anyone. He somehow managed to make it back to his house in Makindye
where he downed one *Uganda waragi* glass after another until he passed
out on his living room floor.

\*\*\*

In 1979 when Amin's government fell Kimala was back in Mulago training
to be a surgeon. The Israeli government requested Uganda to help locate
Dora Bloch's remains. Kimala lead the team that located and exhumed the
body. 'I could remember where the body was buried. We dug up the bones.
Benjamin Bloch, Dora's son, had brought with him her medical records to
help with the identification. Based on some documented dental work, and
an implant in her vertebra, we were able to make a positive
identification. It was a somber moment, but the son appreciated that we
were able to find his mother's remains. He took them and she was given a
proper burial back home in Israel.'

# The Enigmatic Eighties {-}

> > ~***Do not forget,Â through all the years***~

> > ~***Those who have gone throughÂ the gates of Makerere  
Give them the pride,Â Give them the joy  
Oh! To remember,Â the gates of Makerere***~  


The first weeks of medical school went by in a flash. Everything was  
new. While the students in other faculties carried on partying as was  
the custom at the beginning of every academic year, the medical students  
plunged into serious study. The cadaver room was the center of the new
class. Small groups of five or six students each were assigned a
cadaver. The introductory lecture in Anatomy was on the breast, but
nobody called it that. Here in Anatomy it was the mammary gland. The
arm, also called the upper limb, was more appropriately called the
brachium. It was here that the seeds of complete language alteration
were sowed, so that in future the doctors would think that *pedal edema*
communicated better than swelling of the feet, and that *epistaxis* was
clearer than nasal bleeding. It was here in the cadaver room that fears
were overcome, and that lifelong relationships developed. There was
something comforting about discovering that the smartest sounding guys
did not necessarily have the steadiest hands at dissection, and that
some unassuming students with thick rural accents had incredible
capacity to memorize endless random facts about the human body. In a few
weeks everyone was comfortable in the company of the cadavers, which
were slowly but surely being taken apart layer by chloroform infused
layer. Prof. Sebuwufu said these were the students' first patients, and
they were to take good care of them. Dr. A. Galloway, the first head of
the Department of Anatomy, would have been impressed.

Some organs were described as being pear or almond shaped although there
was not one pear tree in all of Uganda, and God help the student who
dared to liken them to an avocado, a fruit the students and their
teachers saw and ate on a regular basis. The normal ovary was said to be
almond shaped. The students had never seen an almond, and the ovaries in
the cadavers were anything but normal, so their imagination of what an
almond looked like would have to do. In the clinical years there would
be other curiosities, such as the cobblestone appearance of a trachoma
eye membrane. No student had seen real life cobblestones, and perhaps
neither had some of their teachers, but cobblestone it would be. Then
there was the classic anchovy sauce appearance of an amoebic liver
abscess. For goodness' sake, what was an anchovy? The descriptions
tended to obscure rather than illuminate. The height of obscurity was
perhaps the '*cafÃ© au lait*' spots, which would have been familiar had
someone told the students that the exotic sounding phrase was French for
milky coffee. Students that had not been within thousands of miles of
any snow were taught how to recognize a diseased lung by a 'snow storm'
appearance on the radiograph. The endless hours in the cadaver room, the
physiology lab, and the wards that the students would graduate to after
two years of basic sciences ensured that their new language took firm
root. Karungi, by nature generously endowed with a curiosity for words
and languages, soaked up -- or rather, imbibed -- this new language like
a sponge.

\*\*\*

The post-mortem room -- PM room -- was cooler than the rest of the
hospital, being adjacent to the refrigerators that contained what the
Pathology professor called the teachers. 'The dead teach us many things.
They make us wise if we take the time to study them. They come here
carrying many secrets. Every dead body is a wealth of wisdom. So -- open
them up with respect. Look. Feel. Here in this room the dead speak. This
is the House of Wisdom.' More often than not Prof. Wamukota said this
while shaking the ash off the end of a cigarette. He probably used one
matchstick a day, because he always lit the next cigarette off the butt
of the one he was snuffing out. It did not matter that he saw many
deaths from tobacco related diseases. He always said it was a pity for
one to die with clean lungs. 'Look! Clean as can be. This girl never
smoked a cigarette, and very likely never cooked on a charcoal stove
either. No trace of smoke. But what use are her lungs now?' Prof.
Wamukota called every female a girl, no matter how old they were. 'This
girl of seventy five years came to the hospital with a cough, night
fevers, and weight loss...' It always drew chuckles, but one had to be
careful to not be seen laughing, because then one became the target for
his caustic humor and ridicule. 'Yes, you Nsereko. Come and tell us what
you see here. Is that a normal liver?' A bony black forefinger tapped
ash off the end of the almost finished cigarette, and brought it back to
equally black lips, eyes barely open through the cloud of smoke, but
clearly seeing enough to decipher the secrets hidden away in the dead
woman's liver. The PM sessions were optional, and they took place during
lunch hour, but one missed them to one's peril. They were introduced in
the late forties by the first head of Pathology, Prof. J.N.P. Davies,
and had survived the many changes in location and management over the
decades. The cold grey concrete slabs on which the bodies lay, the
strong formaldehyde smell, the solid swing doors that separated this
area from the rest of the hospital -- this was probably the way things
were when the mortuary was moved here in 1962.

Most of Prof. Wamukota's exam questions came from his lunchtime
sessions, so they were well attended. From here it was rumoured that he
would make his way to Katanga, an infamous slum sprawled between
Makerere and Mulago hills where cheap alcohol and even cheaper women
waited for university students and professors alike. There was a running
joke that a student who frequented Katanga walked into an oral exam, and
the professor looked him up and down before asking, 'So -- apart from
the bar, have we ever met anywhere?' Needless to say, the student failed
the exam. The vivas, as the oral exams were called, were by far the most
dreaded form of assessment. Nobody knew how the traditions were formed,
but the examiners always appeared determined to outdo each other in
meanness. The student was supposed to be rattled, baited with ambiguous
questions, and humiliated for being ignorant. The questions were often
about obscure conditions to elicit even more obscure answers. It was not
uncommon for a student to be asked about a disease condition that they
had never come across in their three years of diligent clinical
rotations, and to emerge from the viva in tears. Even in this, the
students kept their humor. The more vicious and mean examiners were said
to be malignant. The more reasonable, and those that asked about
conditions that the student was most likely to encounter in the
treatment of everyday patients, were said to be benign. Wamukota had a
permanent seat on the dreaded malignant panel. Fellow Pathology
professor Rwomushana, affectionately called Rwom, on the other hand, was
definitely benign.

\*\*\*

Having left the medical school for Rubaga Hospital, D'Arbela had a
comfortable routine that rotated between time spent at Rubaga, and an
upscale private clinic on Clement Hill Road in Nakasero. One afternoon
he was in his office at the clinic when his head nurse burst in and told
him to get out. 'Leave now. They are looking for you.' D'Arbela had had
the sense that he was under surveillance. It was rumored that he was
supplying the rebels with medicines using the cover of his clinic. He
knew that many people did not get a second warning. He slipped out at
the back while the security officers were at the reception asking about
him. He had left his car in front of the clinic though, so he had to
make the split second decision to either make a dash for it, or abandon
it and find some other way to leave the area. He decided to get to his
car. He was just pulling out when the soldiers came out the clinic. He
hit the accelerator and sped away, but he knew the clock was now ticking
for him. He was due for sabbatical at the Medical School, so kept his
head low for a couple of days, bought a ticket, and left the country
without ceremony. His first stop was London where he was no stranger,
having trained at St. Thomas Hospital. He would later move to Saudi
Arabia and make that his home for the next several years. Back home the
exodus of health workers continued, each with their own unique story.

\*\*\*

Dr. Kanyerezi was head of the Department of Medicine when one of his
colleagues came to see him with a worrying story. Dr. Obache said he had
been told by a close relative that some soldiers were planning to harm
him. The relative was married to someone who worked as a secretary at
the Army headquarters, and she had overheard some conversations. He had
laughed it off the first time he heard about the threat, but the night
before he had come home to find a strange car parked close to his gate.
In the morning, he had noticed the same car at the end of the street as
he drove out, and it had followed him to the hospital entrance. Although
the car had civilian number plates he thought he saw some people in
military uniform in his rear view mirror.

'Obache, if you feel threatened, get out. Do not wait. We can give you a
leave of absence until things get better.'

The following day Obache returned with an update. 'I have been offered
military protection. I now have a tent full of soldiers in my compound.
They are going to protect me.'

'You trust these people?' Kanyerezi was incredulous. 'What are you doing
here? How can you trust soldiers to protect you? You are not a soldier.
Obache, just get away.'

'I think I am now okay. I have been assured that I will be safe.' Obache
looked more relaxed than the day before, and the two doctors parted and
went about their day's business.

Three days later Obache was killed in his house in Kololo. The soldiers
that were supposed to ensure his personal safety were nowhere in sight
when the killers came. From what his colleagues and relatives could
piece together, Obache was considered a traitor by his Langi kinsmen. He
had stayed in the country and thrived during Amin's time when all the
Langi, particularly the elite, were being hunted down. His wife had
worked as a secretary to the Minister of Finance under Amin.

Kanyerezi's turn to flee came through bizarre circumstances only a few
weeks later. The end of term exams in the Department of Medicine had
ended without incident. Results were displayed in the usual manner, and
the students who had not passed were required to repeat the rotation.
Four months later, someone reported that the Department of Medicine had
'failed UPC students.' There was no way the lecturers could have
arranged this even if they had wanted to, because they did not know
which students had what political leanings. The accusation was initially
dismissed, but an insider revived it and escalated it directly to Vice
President Paulo Muwanga.

'Who is this Kanyerezi, to think he can just fail UPC students? We shall
teach him a lesson', Muwanga said. One of the people present in the
office when Muwanga was told about the UPC students' examination results
sought to alert Kanyerezi that he was now a marked man. The information
eventually got to him the following day. He did not need much
persuasion, remembering the fate of his colleague Obache. He drove home,
prepared his family as best he could for such an abrupt departure, and
around 7pm he drove out of his gate despite the nighttime curfew that
was in effect. Because he did not have a better plan yet, he drove from
his home in Rubaga to neighboring Lungujja and the whole family spend
the night with friends. 'A couple of hours after we left the house a
military truck full of soldiers drove up to the gate. Finding that there
was nobody at home, they shot several rounds of ammunition in the air
and left.' Over the next several days, Kanyerezi either lay low or moved
with great stealth. A friend took him to see a sympathetic Member of
Parliament who was also a major in the army, to find out just how grave
the situation was. Major Angwa offered to get him military protection.
'No thank you! I will take my chances without their help.' He reached
out to the university Vice Chancellor, Prof. Wandera, explained his
predicament, and let him know that the department was going to need a
new head. Through a network of friends, he secured help with escape
plans. In the end, he left the country in a UNICEF vehicle that was
destined for Kenya to pick up supplies. His wife followed soon after in
the same manner. A few months later, Dr. Charles Olweny who had taken
over as acting head of department when Kanyerezi left was on the run
himself, and ended up in Nairobi. The two men had a reunion and, despite
their dire circumstances, had a good laugh at how fate worked. They were
among the forerunners of the generation that would go ahead to have
illustrious medical careers while scattered in the diaspora.

\*\*\*

David Kisumba was the first Ugandan orthopedic professor, attaining this
status at a relatively young age. The reason few people know of him is
that he died a truly untimely and premature death in a road traffic
crash in Kololo, then a posh quiet neighborhood north of Kampala central
business district. Nevertheless, he left an impression on his young
nephew Mutyaba, who determined that he would be an orthopedic surgeon as
well. The aspiration would have died the death of many such youthful
dreams had his ambition not met with providence in the names of
Professor Rodney Belcher, an American Navy flight surgeon who for some
reason fell in love with Uganda. Belcher was no stranger to East Africa.
He had started in Dar es Salaam as professor of surgery in the
seventies. In 1983, he came to Makerere as a Fulbright lecturer, but the
country was in the throes of a full scale civil war, and he was forced
to relocate to Nairobi. He was so committed to working in Uganda though,
that after the war ended in 1986 he started planning on his return.
Return he did, to a badly run down Mulago Hospital, where there were no
orthopedic services to speak about, and where all surgical services were
a major struggle. Belcher realized that the care of the diseases of the
bones and joints was always going to lag behind unless a department was
created where specialists could be trained. He was going to begin from
the ground up. Mutyaba, who already had his general surgical training
under his belt, was his first student. They needed a ward, an operating
room, consulting rooms, classrooms ... they needed a lot of
infrastructure that did not exist in post-war Mulago in 1988. What did
exist though, that came to their aid, was a dilapidated bungalow in Old
Mulago that housed patients with disabilities, mainly from polio. Having
identified the house as a potential base, Belcher had to find the money.
For this he turned to his old friends from his airforce days. One of
them was now a Senator, and Belcher thought he might find a way to get
his dream department funded. He went back home, asked around, and then
decided that Mutyaba would be helpful in telling their story. Before
long Mutyaba was on a plane to the USA to work with Belcher on a
proposal that would hopefully get funded through his Senate connections.
Their hard work paid off. A War Victims Fund had just been established,
and the Belcher-Mutyaba proposal talked of helping to treat the huge
backlog of both veterans and civilians that had been injured during the
five-year civil war in Uganda. With time, the money came, and the
Department of Orthopedics was born.

\*\*\*

Kweete had been on the antenatal ward for a week already. She had been
admitted for observation, and to ensure that she would get specialist
attention when she went into labour. So far, her pregnancy had not
worsened her heart condition as had been feared. She did not know what
to expect, this being her first pregnancy.

By 1986 Flavia Katende had been an instructor and midwife in Mulago for
more than a decade. In that time she had taught several generations of
nurses and medical students to deliver babies safely. Yet every year
there was some additional form of improvisation. She remembered that
during her own training it would have been unacceptable for there to be
only one health worker at a delivery. The doctor or midwife usually had
a receiving nurse, so that once the baby was out, the receiving nurse
took care of the baby while the midwife ensured that the placenta, or
afterbirth, was delivered safely. They gave the patient *ergometrine*
injection to reduce the bleeding, and gently rubbed the abdomen to
encourage the uterus to contract, further reducing the bleeding from the
placenta bed. The midwife or attending doctor did not leave the mother's
side until the placenta was out and confirmed to be complete, the
bleeding had all but stopped, and the mother was clean and comfortable.
All that now seemed like fiction. Katende was aware that on some nights
only one midwife was on duty in the maternity unit, assisted by
inexperienced student nurses that were still terrified of the thought of
cutting through skin and flesh. Delivery sets, the collection of
instruments and supplies that one had to have in order to perform a safe
delivery, had dwindled to a pair of rewashed gloves, a pair of old
needle forceps, a blunt reusable needle, and loose cotton swabs. She had
finally stopped giving her teaching on how to prepare for a normal
delivery, because she could not bring herself to go through what were
clearly fictitious lists. Students would never have seen the entire set
anyway.

The evening of 25 January 1986 the maternity unit was unusually quiet.
Lately the insecurity around Mulago had reached such levels that
patients who did not come in before dark could not come in until the
following morning. For some that would be too late. Katende would have
gone home already but she was concerned about the teenager on the corner
bed who was unlikely to have a normal delivery. She was the textbook
high risk *prime gravida*, or first time pregnant; short frame, narrow
pelvis, and although the baby felt small, its head had not descended
into the pelvis with the increasing contractions. Katende usually told
young doctors to be aware of this 'failure to progress' in labor, and to
plan intervention sooner rather than later, as a normal delivery was
unlikely and unsafe. The doctors always took the decisions, but the more
experienced midwives could tell which patients were not going to make it
on their own. Katende knew the teenager was headed for a C-section, but
there was no anesthetist in Gynea theatre. There were no doctors either.

\*\*\*

The war had been advancing from Luweero towards Kampala for a long time,
and in many people's minds this was how things were always going to be,
but the last one month had been different. It was becoming clear that
the guerrillas -- 'a*bayekera*' -- were moving on the city, and that the
government forces were not going to stop them. The day before the
gunfire had been so close that the midwives joked that they did not need
to deliver the babies -- they were popping out at the sound of the
shootings. But today was strangely quiet. The Senior House Officer and
the interns should have been here. If they were not in the hospital by
now, they were not coming. What was she to do with the young mother? And
there was the patient with heart disease as well. These two were going
to need doctors.

\*\*\*

Kweete went into labour in the night. The labour progressed without
incident and at dawn she gave birth to a baby boy, assisted by two
student midwives. Shortly after birth the baby started turning blue, a
sign that he was not getting enough oxygen into his blood. The nurses
took the baby to the nursery where newborn babies received more
intensive care. A few hours later the tragic news came -- despite the
doctors' best efforts, the baby had died. The doctors said there were
serious defects in his heart and major blood vessels which were
incompatible with life. Kweete was plunged into the depths of grief. She
declined to have a post mortem done, and chose to bury her baby 'without
him being turned into a specimen'. As the country started to cautiously
celebrate the victory of the NRA and the end of the bush war, Kweete
mourned the death of the baby that had barely lived.

\*\*\*

On 20 December 1988, President Museveni visited Mulago Hospital. The
staff of the hospital gathered in Davies Lecture Theatre to listen to
him. The president was dapper in a stylish suit and tie, and had an
infectious optimism about him, if a little cocky in his speech. This was
the boardroom president; the bush guerrilla fighter was gone. He
captivated the nurses and doctors with his plans, which reflected a
passion for the rapid development of the country, after decades of
mismanagement and neglect.

'We must have this capacity,' he said. 'Capacity to build houses, roads,
stores, dams ... railways. I am building a railway construction unit. I
am using the Kasese line as an opportunity to build a railway
construction unit. We must build the railway ourselves.' Every eye was
on the President's face, hanging onto his every word. 'You know when we^[National Resistance Army] came, we found that they^[Obote's
government] had a plan to get USD200 million to lay the rails. I asked
them what exactly the money was for. I said, 'Two hundred million
dollars is a lot of money. Tell me - exactly what are you going to do
with this money? To lay iron bars from here to Kasese on a firm base?'
Museveni laughed. The audience chuckled in agreement. 'If the British
could build a railway from Mombasa to here in 1900, why is it so
difficult for us now? So I said, no, let us look at the figures. And you
know what? Most of that money was not going into the rails. It was going
into building toilets, houses ... I said, no! This must stop!'

The medics were impressed with a president that interrogated the
figures. They could well imagine how he was going to move from the
railway to the waste and neglect in the health system. Many of them were
already imagining better equipped operating rooms. A revamped intensive
care unit. A stable electricity supply. Better salaries. Stephen
Kijjambu, a young surgeon that had already seen his fair share of
dysfunction and scarcity, was filled with optimism. Museveni's talk was
music to his ears. If the British were able to build Mulago from nothing
in the late fifties, he thought, how could the renovation and equipping
of the hospital be so difficult now?

\*\*\*

In the late 1980s the medical community was introduced to 'new'
infections. Some were known and had in fact been common at one time in
the distant past, but there were a few entirely new ones. They had names
that young doctors had never heard of: *Cryptococcus neoformans*,
*pneumocystis carinii, toxoplasmosis.* The only reason these rare
organisms were able to re-emerge was because the Human Immunodeficiency
Virus (HIV) had so weakened the patients' immune systems that almost
anything could now take root and grow. The weak system was allowing them
the opportunity to establish themselves, and to prosper where they
otherwise would not have. That meant that in treatment it was not good
enough just to kill the offending organisms, as others would very
rapidly replace them. One had to find ways to boost the immunity of the
patients to the point where their bodies would not give opportunity to
the organisms to flourish. What made it very challenging was that the
organs that ordinarily defended the body were themselves the first to
come under attack. It was as though the enemy was coming in quietly,
burning down the arsenals and armories around the country, and then
going on rampage. Even if the army knew that the enemy was present, even
if they could see the enemy troops, they would have no means of
countering the attacks. Treatment plans in these immunosuppressed
patients were fire-fighting from frightening beginning to painful
finish. Doctors were throwing antibiotics at this bug, anti-virals at
that one, anti-fungals this week, more antibiotics the following week
\... finally chemotherapy when an opportunistic cancer reared its ugly
head. All this in a patient much weakened by disease, ravaged by
constant fevers, and barely able to eat or keep any food down. The
assault was usually relentless. The end was usually predictable.

What was not predictable, and what warmed the heart in those dark and
seemingly endless months and years of losing patients almost as fast as
they came in, was the fighting spirit of the medical staff. They might
be exhausted, they might be poorly paid, some might be sick themselves,
but they never gave up the fight. The nurses fetched the medicines from
the pharmacy and handed them out to bony hands wrapped in dry spotted
skin. But they handed them out anyway. They put up intravenous lines on
patients that they knew were going to be dead the following day. But
they still put the lines up anyway. The doctors did rounds, examined
patients whose diagnoses were obvious even to the illiterate relatives,
and they ordered for tests and sent off specimens -- they did what they
knew best to do, day after wretched day.

Dr. Katabira, a young physician who had just returned from the UK, set
up a special clinic to treat patients with HIV and the resulting
Acquired Immunosuppressive Disease Syndrome (AIDS). The clinic was
almost instantly the most crowded clinic in the hospital. He and his
team were working from 7 am until the last patient was seen, usually
late in the afternoon. He came under criticism from even his close
colleagues, who argued that the hospital needed to create a special ward
for those affected by this new killer, and not to be seeing all those
patients in the same space used by other clinics. His counter argument
was that nobody knew how long the hospital was going to ride the tide.
What proportion of the population was affected? What would they do when
more and more patients came? Create more special wards? Where would they
get the staff to work in the special ward? It was early days, he argued
-- the medical profession did not know enough about how the disease was
being transmitted, so everyone had to be on high alert. Precautions had
to be taken by everyone all the time, in every patient encounter. While
the debate was still raging, patients started turning up in every ward
and discipline, with symptoms suggestive of HIV. Pregnant mothers. Young
men with charcoal-black wounds on the soles of their feet that would not
heal. Small children with unusually aggressive jaw tumors. Talk of
creating a special ward died a natural death. The medical fraternity,
irrespective of ward or department, rolled up their sleeves and went to
work. They started to notice patterns and pointers. Like a team of
detectives, they carefully noted documented every clue, and filed it
away as the evidence against the new virus mounted. It was many of those
observations, made by ordinary doctors, nurses, radiographers, and
pathologists, that made significant contributions to the fight against
HIV.

It soon emerged that HIV not only could, but was in all likelihood being
transmitted through blood and other body fluids. For the medical staff
this was very frightening. It struck terror in every heart. Medical
workers had been handling immunosuppressed patients with no protection
whatsoever. Needles were being boiled for reuse. Gloves were being
washed and reused in places like the operating rooms and maternity
wards. Nobody had ever had reason to wear two pairs of gloves at the
same time, a practice that soon became standard as awareness about the
epidemic increased. It was common, especially during long operations and
procedures involving splintered bone, for the surgeons to finish the
operation, peel off their gloves, and find a bloody finger or thumb, an
indication that there had been a leak in the glove. A bone splinter or a
needle prick? Was that the patient's blood, or the surgeon's? Had the
patient's blood found its way into the surgeon's bloodstream? That might
happen even when one was aware that the patient they were operating
carried the virus. With confirmed transmission through blood, one would
have expected one of two things to happen; either that the hospitals
would rapidly empty of health workers terrified of contracting HIV, or
that the government would jump into action to ensure that there were
enough resources to make precautions against HIV transmission not just
available, but mandatory everywhere. Neither happened. Universal
precautions, as they came to be known, became another one of those
things that in a rational world should be taken for granted, but in
Uganda they joined a long list of health care needs that were never met,
because somehow, the money could not be found. There was always another
financial year, sometime in the future. How many health workers
contracted the virus through contact with patients, even after the modes
of transmission had become clear, will never be known.

# The Nutty Nineties {-}

> > ~***Those who here be, Seek ye the truth***~

> > ~***Build for the future, the great Makerere  
Those here have been, Those here will be  
Build for the future,  
The Great Makerere***~

Benjamin Semakula started off intending to go to Mengo Hospital. But as
he was leaving the house it occurred to him that he had never been to
that hospital as a patient, and he did not really want to go there. He
would go to Mulago. That was what made sense. Semakula had retired some
fifteen years back from Mulago Hospital, where he had been an anesthetic
officer for more than thirty years. He had joined the staff as a theatre
nurse during the time Prof. MacAdam was Head of Surgery, and he had
worked in his theatre. Because he was noted to be very handy, he was
often asked to assist the anesthetist with cleaning the equipment and
watching the patients in recovery room. Over time he was encouraged to
train as an anesthetic assistant, and by the time Prof. Kyalwazi took
over as Head of Surgery, he was working as an anesthetist. He knew every
surgeon that ever practiced in the hospital, and most knew him as well.

He walked along the familiar corridor from the second floor parking,
past the Radiology Department, and through the double doors of the
Department of Surgery. The doors squeaked and groaned badly, partly
because the right one was unhinged at the top. He stood just outside the
department secretary's office, and noticed a long line-up of portraits
to the right. He moved closer and realized they were portraits of all
the heads of department since the creation of the department back in
1928.

A young lady looked up from a magazine. '*Wangi sebo*?' 'Yes sir?'

'*Omukulu mwali*?' 'Is the Head in?'

'*Nedda*.' 'No'

She went on to explain that if he was a patient he should go to the
Surgical Outpatient Clinic, as the Head of Department did not see
patients in the office. She turned back to her magazine, making it clear
that the conversation was over. Semakula could see the inner door that
led to the office of the Head of Department. He had been in that office
a few times to see Prof. Kyalwazi. When he needed a hernia operation
Kyalwazi saw him from the ward, but for his follow-up he examined him
here. He wondered if someone had changed the furniture. A heavy set
mahogany desk at which Kyalwazi sat with his back to the window; an
examination table in the corner, where he had been examined; a bookshelf
directly opposite the desk, facing the window. Strange, he thought, that
he should be standing outside this office, at a loss for what to do. He
was now an unknown old man, probably seen as an inconvenience. He was
about to move away when a young looking doctor came in through the
squeaky double doors.

'Good morning Florence', he called.

'Morning Sir'. The secretary did not lift her head from her magazine.

The doctor walked right by Semakula without so much as a glance, paused
very briefly at the secretary's desk, then turned and entered the office
of the Head of Surgery. Could he be the Head? He looked too young to be
Head, but Semakula noted that he had entered the office with an air of
confidence. The thought of appealing to the youthful doctor over his
current health problems was unappealing. But maybe he could recommend
one of his older colleagues. He approached the secretary again, and
waited for her to take her attention from the magazine. After a long
while she got up and went to the tray by the edge of the table where a
number of files were pending. She was being deliberate in not addressing
him. It was not possible that she did not notice him waiting for her
attention. Any other time he would have simply walked away, but the pain
in his back was reminder enough that he really needed to see a doctor.
He turned as though to go away, but something rose up in him, from
somewhere deep in his chest, an anger, a refusal to be ignored. Without
thinking about what he was going to say, he found himself walking to the
inner door, and opening it without knocking. It happened so quickly, the
secretary was caught off guard. She started to protest, rebuking him for
the disruption. But that one act of defiance had called to the surface
the old Semakula, the one that refused to be put down, the one that had
risen from a dresser to a nurse, all the way up to anesthetist by sheer
determination, probably before this secretary was born. He looked back
once and firmly closed the door in her face. There!

\*\*\*

This was Dr. Karungi's favorite place in all of Mulago Hospital. The
Accident and Emergency Department (A&E) was loud and chaotic, but there
was a method to this madness. There was an ebb and flow, and patients
were seen around the clock. It covered a wide area. The main entrance
led into a hall of sorts where patients were registered and sorted, and
where they might wait a few minutes or several hours to be seen by a
health worker. Wide swing doors separated this area from the treatment
and resuscitation rooms to the right. Further down the corridor past the
treatment rooms was an X-ray unit, and operating rooms were at the
extreme end. It was in the space beyond the swing doors that patients
were saved or lost. It was here that destinies were changed. Beyond the
waiting room, going deeper into the hospital, was the Emergency
Admission ward. In theory all patients that came to the A&E could stay
only until 8.00am of the following day. At that point the doctors who
had been on call would do the rounds, and discharge those who were well
enough to go home. The rest of the patients were sent to the wards for
longer hospitalisation. From around 9.00am when the rounds ended, the
nurses and porters were busy transferring patients to various wards. But
there were many patients that neither went home nor found beds in the
already overcrowded wards.

In reality the A&E never emptied. Soon enough new patients would begin
to arrive, and by afternoon the ward would be full again. Over the next
eighteen hours patients would continue to be admitted to the A&E,
occupying every conceivable space until it was not possible to move
between beds without stepping on a patient. On particularly busy days,
sick children shared beds, and there were patients under the beds and in
the corridors. In these conditions, no bedside procedures were possible,
and indeed many were simply not done. The two nurses on duty had to be
experts at determining how to apportion their most precious resource --
their time. Doctors would by habit write instructions like 'monitor
blood pressure every 2 hours', or 'keep a fluid input-output chart', but
both the doctors and nurses knew that nothing of the sort was going to
happen. It had been years since such charts were routine. The hospital
did not even print the required stationery anymore. And if they had,
there was no chance at all that they would be used. If a nurse on duty
started recording the patients' vital signs in such charts as required
by either the doctor or the patient's condition, he would never do
anything else. The same nurse needed to admit patients, go to the
pharmacy to fetch drugs and supplies, hand out medicines, and assist the
doctor to do some emergency procedures. He then needed to write a report
and hand over to the next shift when the time came. Most times the nurse
would see a patient once -- when the patient first came to the ward. All
of those instructions that the doctor wrote concerning the patient would
go unattended, because by the time the doctor made their way through the
sea of patients, taking histories, examining patients, writing
prescriptions and the endless unheeded instructions, the nurse would
have to move on to other equally urgent duties. Some patients needed to
be prepared for emergency operations. Some were just being wheeled back
from the operating room, with tubes and bottles that needed attention.
These critically ill patients were usually kept close to the nurses'
desk so that they could keep an eye on them, with the help of their
relatives. Here the relatives -- also euphemistically called attendants
-- were the real nurses. They fed their patients; cleaned them, gave
them their medicines, and in some cases they even changed their
dressings. It mattered not that most of these relatives had until now
never held a bandage in their hands, and that they had no understanding
of the world of microbes and antiseptics, the overstretched nurses fully
expected them to change soiled dressings, and to feed unconscious
patients through tubes that run through the nose into the stomach.

\*\*\*

The Post-graduate students' common room, or PG room as it was known, was
a second home to the residents, who spent more time there than they did
in their homes. When not in the hospital, chances were they were here,
reading, napping, discussing cases, arguing, and drinking endless cups
of tea. Subjects ranged from patient care -- theater flooded again, so
no operations today, the patient run away, that patient that looked half
dead is walking about today, I don't believe that biopsy result, I think
I will send for a repeat, if I don't get an ICU bed for that kid now she
is going to succumb .., to sports, to girls and guys, to religion, to
politics -- any and everything could be discussed here. If a resident
was worried about an operation they were planning, they could recruit an
assistant among the group, so that the risk was shared. Or someone would
offer a suggestion if they had done a similar case before. If a patient
died and one was feeling awful, this was the place to come and bare
one's heart -- people understood. Everyone here had lost a patient that
they set out to save. Everyone had missed a diagnosis. There was usually
no judgment here, only understanding and a certain kind of sibling
support. There were some fights, but never nasty ones. There was an
awareness that the surgery residency was not a party, but a stormy sea
of sorts, and that while everyone had their own individual destiny, for
now they needed to row together if they were going to survive.

Karungi came out of the PG room and, turning the corner a little too
fast, almost ran into a small bodied woman that was lagging a big bag
behind her. She excused herself and stepped aside to let the woman pass,
and was hurrying away when she heard the woman call after her. 'Rungi!'

Karungi span around, her heart skipping a beat. She was instantly thrown
some twenty years back. Only one person in the world ever called her
that.

'Biitu!'

'Yes!' The small woman dropped her bag and came forward hesitantly.
Karungi run forward, and threw her arms around the spare frame, almost
knocking her off the ground. The two women hugged and laughed and hugged
some more. Then Karungi held Biitu by the shoulders and moved back a
step to take a good look at her childhood friend.

'Where have you been? What have you been up to? What are you doing here?
How did you find me? ... '

'Hey ... slow down! Let me explain.'

'Okay, let us get out of the cold and mosquitoes.' Karungi opened the PG
room and switched on the lights. She pulled a lab stool for her friend,
and perched herself on a chair opposite her.

'So -- tell me ...'

Biitu took a deep breath and started. She and her husband had moved to
Nyabushozi where he worked at a cattle ranch. Biitu's father had passed
on, and the rest of the family had relocated to a more remote village in
a neighboring district. Her husband had died two years back, leaving her
with their five children, the oldest now sixteen, and the youngest six.
A year after the husband died Biitu started having irregular vaginal
bleeding and pain in the lower abdomen. Several hospital visits and
unsuccessful treatments later, it was discovered that she had cancer of
the cervix. The doctor who broke the news told her the cancer was fairly
advanced, but he said that radiotherapy would help. So here she was
trying to get an appointment at the Radiotherapy Unit.

'So who is watching the kids while you are here?'

'Our first boy Koojo is old enough. We have a stall in the market where
he sells porridge. Lydia, my oldest girl, helps him with the cooking
after school. They are alright.'

Karungi could remember when they were twelve. They could not possibly
have made meals for the family. But this was the era of child-led
households. Here were two kids holding the fort while their mother
traveled to Kampala to receive radiotherapy for a potentially fatal
condition.

Biitu had changed a great deal with the years. She wore a bulky weave
that framed her small face, giving her more body. Bushy untamed eyebrows
hang over quick brown eyes. Her colorful African print dress was fitting
down to the waist, and opened into a full skirt, giving her a girly
appearance. She waved her strong, well worked hands as she recounted her
story.

The one thing that had not changed despite five children, the death of a
husband, and a cancer diagnosis, was Biitu's mischievous grin and
infectious optimism. Looking at her face, one would have thought that
she was here over some trivial complaint. It was amazing how, in a
country as small as Uganda, the two close childhood friends had not seen
each other in decades. Karungi had completed secondary school and gone
on to medical school, then internship, and now a residency in surgery.
No husband, no kids. Their worlds could not have been more different.

The two women would have carried on talking, but just then Karungi's
pager went off. She jumped up, took a look at it, and grabbed her
clinical coat. 'Let's talk as we walk. I am on call and will be heading
to theatre shortly,' Karungi told her friend.

At the rail, she pointed Biitu to the footpath that led to the
Radiotherapy hostel, and dashed down to the A&E. She would look in on
her in the morning.

\*\*\*

Patients started arriving at the Radiotherapy unit as early as 6.30am.
Usually the nurses and doctors would begin to arrive around 8.00am, and
the treatments would begin shortly after that. But this morning was
unusual. After hours of waiting, the patients were told that a crucial
piece of the radiotherapy machine was not working, and that the
replacement would have to come from Europe. All the patients were
advised to go home and return after a couple of weeks.

Biitu did not think she would be able to turn around that quickly. Maybe
after a couple of months. Before she left to go back to the village,
Biitu talked about how wonderful it would be to get some good amount of
porridge flour. They would be able to raise next term's fees from it.
Biitu might be gone by then, but she was confident that the son would
manage. She talked about her impending death almost as though she was
going to some foreign country from which she would return at some future
date. Karungi helped her to get the flour, and she was beside herself
with gratitude. Apart from the hefty bag containing maize flour and
other groceries, Biitu had a roomy handbag that carried two bottles of
oral morphine, a type of strong pain relief medicine given to patients
with painful terminal conditions. Karungi drove her to the bus park in
downtown Kampala and waited until all of her bags had been put in the
hold. Biitu found a nice seat by the window and waved happily to
Karungi, who waved back before driving off amidst impatient honks from
drivers waiting to take the parking spot. The thought crossed her mind
that she might not be seeing her childhood friend again, ever.

\*\*\*

Kweete had been in Heart Institute enough times that many of the nurses
there knew her by name. When Karungi came in Kweete had an oxygen mask
over her face, with a tube running from a cylinder by the side of the
bed. There was a meter on this cylinder to show how much oxygen was
being delivered. She recalled a time when she was in this same ward,
maybe same cylinder, and instead of the oxygen meter there was a
disposable water bottle with flimsy rubber tubes stuck through its
cover. Things were looking up. What caught her attention though, were
Kweete's nails. They were perfectly polished a gleaming crimson red. She
wondered who had been here painting the nails of a woman so sick that
she needed an oxygen mask.

The Mulago Hospital where Kweete lay was opened a week after Uganda got
its independence from colonial master Britain. But a more modest
facility had occupied the upper part of the hill that bears the same
name for nearly half a century. That older facility came to be known as
Old Mulago, and its younger sibling as New Mulago. Though decades
separated their births, the two were like Siamese twins, intimately
connected, their fates intricately linked, sharing not just the name,
but water and power supply lines, staff, and the steady stream of
patients that went between the two.

At the time of its opening Mulago was one of the best hospitals on the
African continent, but years of neglect had taken their toll. Yet there
were small corners of Mulago Hospital and the Medical School complex
that were thriving. It was to one such corner that Karungi turned to
follow up on her cousin's lab results in order to determine the cause of
this current infectious episode.

The lab was located on the topmost floor of the decrepit Pathology
Building. It had state-of-the-art equipment from the USA. To get to it
one walked along dusty ground floor corridors and past smelly toilets,
with long cobweb vines from long dead weavers still swinging in the
corners; and up four flights of chipped terrazzo stairs until the final
landing. On the extreme left was a steel door with an ultra-modern
sensor at eye level. Paul who headed the lab, and who Karungi had
appealed to for help, placed his index finger over the sensor and the
door slid silently open. It closed behind them ever so gently, that
Karungi barely noticed. The room was air conditioned, and spotless clean
-- maybe even sterile. It was a long lab extending easily the length of
a good 20 meters. There were gleaming refrigerators along the wall on
one side, and several pieces of equipment at work stations on the other
side. Lab technicians in white coats were busy. And quiet. Paul asked
Karungi when the samples were submitted, and walked to the desk in one
corner where the records were kept. He punched the information into a
console, and after a brief interval there was the gentle purr of a
printer, and the results rolled out. Paul explained that any specimens
whose results were contentious after being reviewed by at least two
specialists were sent digitally to two different reference labs -- one
in India, and one in Ohio, USA. Within twenty four hours they usually
had two expert opinions with which to compare their own results. Armed
with these latest results, Karungi hurried back to the Heart Institute
where Kweete's doctors would determine the most suitable medication.

Karungi's week was darkened by a death on table from diabetes and
gangrene. She remembered what Mr. G.S.W. Kamya, the consultant surgeon
that she worked under the most, had told her years before. It had been
over a patient with intestinal obstruction, who had had four previous
operations. Kamya had cautioned the Senior House Officers about
operating on such patients. He said a surgeon had to weigh their chances
of success very carefully. 'Anyone can operate', he had said in his
usual low, almost lazy drawl. He let that sink in. 'At your level I do
not need to teach you how to operate. That you will learn easily enough.
What you must spend the rest of your time learning is when *not* to
operate.' That piece of wisdom had stayed with her. It had prevented her
from making many ill-advised decisions. But as they say, eventually
every surgeon meets their Waterloo.

Karungi rehearsed the events leading to the death so many times, but
somehow her mind refused to let it go. The old lady had been diabetic
for at least a decade. She had been admitted to a medical ward with the
diabetes totally out of control, apparently following a chest infection.
The gangrene, or death, of the toe which spread to involve the entire
foot was not recognized for what it was until the toe started turning
black. At that point the surgical team was called in and the patient was
eventually moved to the surgical ward for the care of the foot. Then
started the battle -- the poorly controlled blood sugar was fueling the
gangrene, and the gangrene was in turn making the sugar control
monumentally difficult. The decision was further complicated by the
patient and her relatives who would not hear of an amputation. '*What?
Cut the whole foot off? Why not just the toe?*' A hastily constituted
family meeting was held and a ward nurse assured them that only the dead
part would be removed, and not the whole leg, as was now being feared.
Sooner or later, the dead foot would have to go. The see-saw had tipped
towards operating and the ill-fated task had fallen to Karungi. She felt
that the death could have been avoided. She tormented herself with the
options that had existed, but which were now useless. She should have
operated sooner. She should have had one of the internists at hand to
deal with the sugar control. She should have double and triple checked
the lab results, and not believed the first ones which showed that the
patient's ketoacidosis had resolved. She should have insisted on a more
senior anesthesiologist. She should have ... shouldn't have ... should
have ... She comforted herself with the thought that she had learnt the
lesson. Another piece of wisdom from the theatre corridors came back:
when you lose the patient do not lose the lesson.

\*\*\*

Winnie came from the ward to find a young man waiting outside PG room.
He asked if Dr. Ogundi was around. 'I don't know.' Winnie tried the door
and found it locked. 'Clearly not. Do you have an appointment?'

'No, but he operated my mother, and she is now well and has been
discharged. I thought I would see him before we leave the hospital. I
will wait.' Winnie entered the room and forgot about him until a couple
of hours later when she came out to find him still waiting outside.

'Maybe you should try the ward. Or leave him a message', she suggested.
The young man said he had been to the ward and had not found him. Winnie
turned round and swung the door wide open. 'There -- that is his desk.'
The young man reached into the big *kikapu* -- a bag woven out of palm
leaves -- and pulled out a black plastic bag. She could see the head of
a live chicken peeping through a hole in the bag. She was about to say
he could not leave the chicken there but thought it might be an
interesting surprise for Ogundi. 'Sure, put it over there in the
corner.' He did, Winnie banged the door shut and headed off to the A&E.

Njega and Francis came back and opened the door. Njega sat at his desk
while Francis went to the board and started working on a new sketch.
Suddenly a rustling sound broke out from under the table. They both
turned to look. Silence. A minute or so later there was another sound,
then right before their eyes, a hefty black plastic bag emerged from
under the table, and as though propelled by some unseen hand started to
make its way across the floor in the direction of the board. It quacked
and clicked, and lurched forward in a zigzag manner, getting closer to
Francis with every move. The usually calm Njega bolted from his corner
and was out of the door in a flash, all the while yelling, '*askari!*'
'Guard!' Francis leapt into the air and attempted to land on top of one
of the desks. He narrowly missed, and landed with one foot on a chair,
while the other foot slid off the top of the desk and flew into the air.
He came crashing down to the floor, with his head now only a few inches
from the mysterious black bag, which was now quacking more loudly. A
guard came running, almost rammed into Njega, and asked him what the
matter was. From the doorway, Njega pointed to the bag. By this time
though, the chicken's head had found its way out of the hole, and was
now in full view. 'You doctors are afraid of a chicken?' He laughed with
relief and walked away. Neither of the doctors thought it was funny.
After that incident, it was agreed that nobody would accept packages of
any sort on behalf of a colleague.

\*\*\*

On 11 March 1996 Mutyaba was in a taxi heading to Mulago when he heard
over the radio that a *mzungu* had been shot and killed in Mulago during
a car robbery. The *mzungu*'s name was Belcher. Mutyaba was devastated.
It was a Monday, and he had worked with Belcher on the Friday before.
They still had plans for the expansion of the orthopedic program.
Belcher had been very much alive and full of ideas. He had confided in
Mutyaba that NATO was decommissioning some hospitals, and they might be
getting a helicopter ambulance from that. The two of them had discussed
the potential value of such a service. Belcher had not been just a
resourceful individual and an outstanding surgeon. He had been a mentor,
a colleague, and a friend.

\*\*\*

> > ~***Address to the United States Senate by Senator Patrick Joseph Leahy
(Vermont). Congressional Record, United States Senate, 13 March 1996^[Address to the United States Senate by Senator Patrick Joseph Leahy (Vermont). Congressional Record, United States Senate, 13 March 1996]:***~

> > ~***Mr. President, it is with great sadness that I rise today to inform the
Senate of the tragic death of Dr. Rodney Belcher, an orthopedic surgeon
from Arlington, VA, who was murdered in Kampala, Uganda, on March 13
1996. I was fortunate to have known Dr. Belcher. Seven years ago,
shortly after I established the War Victims Fund, a \$5 million
appropriation in the foreign aid program to provide medical and related
assistance to war victims, Rod Belcher signed on with Health Volunteers
Overseas. He had lived in Uganda before the civil war there, and the
Agency for International Development sent him back to start a War
Victims Fund program to assist people who had been disabled from war
injuries. He and his wife Dawn had been there ever since. There were
tens of thousands of amputees, many victims of landmines, without access
to artificial limbs. The Mulago hospital and medical school, once the
pride and joy of that country, were in ruins. There were not even basic
medical supplies. There was not a single trained orthopedic surgeon in
the country. The Ugandan Government was bankrupt. Rod embraced that
enormous challenge with enthusiasm, good humor, patience, and a deep,
personal commitment to the Ugandan people. Over the years, he won the
trust and respect of the Ugandan Government, and of successive United
States Ambassadors and the ambassadors of other countries who witnessed
the impact he was having on the lives of so many people. He rebuilt the
orthopedic clinic and trained every orthopedic surgeon in Uganda today.
He had a warmth and gentleness, and a commitment to Uganda that was
extraordinary. Mr. President, on March 13, on his way to his office, Dr.
Belcher was murdered when two men stole his car. He was shot in the
chest and died right there. It would be hard to conceive of a more
senseless, horrible crime. Rod Belcher was a wonderfully generous human
being who devoted his professional life to improving the lives of
others. For the past 7 years he lived and worked in a country where
getting even the simplest thing accomplished often required incredible
ingenuity and persistence. Rod had both. At his funeral, Dr. Belcher was
honored by the Ugandan Vice President, the Minister of Health, the
director of the hospital, the dean of the medical school, the American
Ambassador, the British High Commissioner, and many others. The
orthopedic clinic that he worked so hard to establish was formally named
after him. The streets were lined with people who knew him personally or
had heard of the American doctor who had done so much for the Ugandan
people. Rod Belcher will be terribly missed. But he leaves a legacy that
anyone would be proud of. He gave the War Victims Fund its start, and
for that, I will always be grateful. He leaves a core of trained Ugandan
orthopedic surgeons who loved and admired him, who will carry on in his
place.***~

\*\*\*

Karungi was preparing to go to lunch after a relatively quiet morning
when she heard the sound of the Police Patrol vehicle in a distance. She
had come to know when it was the one. In a few minutes the truck pulled
up outside the A&E, and a couple of policemen jumped out of the cabin.
They started to offload their cargo. The Uganda Red Cross volunteers
materialized and helped the policemen to extract what looked like
critically ill patients from under the seats in the back of the truck.
There was a young man and two kids. One of the kids was wailing and
calling for the mother. The other was ominously quiet. The young man's
shirt was hanging in shreds and covered in a mud. The team got busy with
the trio, and they were finishing up when a medical records clerk came
to announce that there was another patient with head injury.

\*\*\*

The patient came in with a slowly expanding blood clot over the right
side of his brain. The history and signs were typical. The 35 year old
man had been thrown off a motorcycle when it collided with a pick-up
truck. He fell into a ditch and was badly shaken, but seemed to be fine
shortly afterwards. Over the next few hours he started to become
confused, incoherent, and finally slipped into unconsciousness. Clearly,
he was continuing to bleed, and the resulting blood clot was putting
pressure on the brain. A surgical procedure was needed to remove the
clot, and time was of the essence. The surgeon was ready, the patient
was ready, and the operating room was alerted. There was one problem.
The operating room did not have the necessary equipment and supplies.
Some, like wax and sutures (threads used in surgical operations), were
easy enough to find in a pharmacy. But diathermy -- a tool that works
much like a welding gun, except in this case it cauterizes and instantly
seals the tiny blood vessels that cause problematic bleeding during
surgery -- one did not just go out and buy. Dr. Senyonyi swore that he
was not going to, as he put it, 'kill another patient in the name of an
emergency operation'.

The family got wind of it. They thought this was an excuse by the
medical staff to extract money from the desperate relatives. One of the
older women approached the nurse and asked if she could speak to the
doctor. The doctor came out. The lady asked the doctor if they needed
money to buy anything for the surgery -- a polite way of asking if they
should organize an inducement. 'No', the doctor said. He explained about
the diathermy.

'So what do we do?'

'I don't know.' The lady did not move. The doctor started to walk away.
He felt trapped. In a couple of hours he was going home, and without the
operation the patient would be gone when he got back the following day.
It was one thing to lose a patient who had a rapidly growing malignant
tumor in his brain; it was another to lose one that could be saved by
such a straightforward procedure -- if one had the right equipment. He
turned back to the lady.

'They have diathermy at Nakasero Hospital'

'How much does it cost?' Despite the gravity of the problem the doctor
chuckled. He had known patients to suggest that they buy all manner of
equipment. A high ranking soldier once asked him how much it cost to buy
an operating microscope. These were not things one bought from a corner
drug shop.

'I don't know how much it costs, but you don't have time to go and
import it. You would need to transfer the patient there.'

'How much does it cost to have him operated from there then? And do we
have to find another surgeon, or do you work there as well?'

'I don't know what it costs, and no, I do not work there. But if you
want to move him you do not have much time. If the pressure over his
brain is not relieved soon the part of his brain that controls his heart
and breathing will die ...' He let the word 'die' hang in the air.
'...*will die* ...'

The lady moved back to the small group huddled at the bottom of the
patient's bed. She recounted the exchange with the doctor. A heated
discussion followed. There were consultations on phones. After a while
the lady that had initiated the discussion approached the doctor's
office again. 'Doctor, we want to go. Please give us the referral. We
shall find the money.'

Dr. Senyonyi had long stopped worrying about these so-called reverse
referrals. Mulago was the national referral hospital, and in principle,
the most advanced medical institution in the country. In theory, one
could not go higher than that. The doctors had been instructed to not
send patients to lower level hospitals except for follow-up. Those
instructions were useless in the face of the current shortages. Many
smaller hospitals in the city were better equipped, and it was no secret
that patients were often moved from Mulago to smaller facilities for
better care. And it wasn't just for the equipment. Some Mulago Hospital
specialists had not stepped in the hospital's operating rooms for years.
One consultant specialist had referred to Mulago only half in jest as a
fishing pond. The patients come to the pond, and the doctors come and
fish for the ones that can afford better services at other hospitals.
Those that remain in Mulago are too anemic to pay anything.

\*\*\*

Josephine walked into the Surgical Emergency ward a few minutes to 8am
as she had done countless times before. She was a near permanent fixture
in the ward, moving in and out of the treatment cubicles, but spending
most of her time in the main resuscitation room. The most critically ill
patients were brought here, usually for life saving procedures --
blocked airways were cleared, and artificial airways were inserted.
Intravenous drips were set up, and if a patient needed an emergency
operation the operating room was only meters away. Josephine knew every
inch of this room, and she treated the equipment here like her prized
personal possessions. She had been praying for a ventilator -- even a
used one -- but that had not happened yet. Today was going to be
difficult though. There had been no oxygen the previous night, and she
had heard on her way in that the situation had not changed. The nurse in
charge of pediatric Acute Care Unit had told her that the unit lost four
babies in as many hours after the oxygen run out. 'We had four babies
sharing an oxygen cylinder, and the room had two cylinders. When the
first cylinder run out we tried to move the babies onto the remaining
one. It was a stretch, fitting all eight babies on one cylinder. Then
around nine in the night the second cylinder run out as well. I was just
leaving. I left the night duty nurses running all over the place to try
and find some oxygen. '

Josephine went to the little cubicle where the nurses kept their street
shoes and changed into the more comfortable pair that she wore at work.
She then went to the office of the A&E In-charge, where she usually
reported to see if there were any particular instructions for the day.
The office was locked. She went through the cubicles, and was relieved
that they were all empty. The trolleys and floor still had evidence of
the night's emergencies -- the sharps containers were full, there were
abandoned blood stained sandals on a trolley, and a half empty bottle of
saline hang over one of the beds, with the catheter sticking out.
Josephine had had many conversations with the nurses on the night shift
about the state of these rooms. If they were not cleaned as soon as
patients were moved, there was always the chance that another patient
could come in dire need of stabilization, and the confusion that was
generated by trying to clean the cubicles as new patients waited
increased chances of cross infection. She was considering going off to
complain to the nurse in charge of the cubicles when she spotted a
Police patrol vehicle make the curve from the fourth level heading
towards the A&E entrance on the third level. 'Here we go', she said
under her breath.

Josephine ran back into the cubicles, pulled a pair of gloves on, and
quickly started to clean up. She wiped all accessible surfaces, and
pulled down the offending saline bottle and dropped it into the bin.
Then she hurried to the triage area to find two Red Cross volunteers
wheeling a trolley towards the entrance, where two of their colleagues
waited to move a patient from the back of the Police Patrol pick-up
truck onto the trolley. The pick-up trucks were the standard way
patients were delivered to hospital following road traffic crashes or
incidents involving violence. It was usually uncertain if the patients
had been assaulted by the Police themselves or if they had sustained the
injuries some other way. The Police were known to be quite brutal
especially with demonstrators. The patient was pulled off the pick-up
and onto the trolley. He was groaning, his face bloody and swollen. One
of his legs was dangling at an awkward angle, prompting the Red Cross
volunteers to slip a splint under it. There was no nurse at the triage
desk so the patient was wheeled directly into the resuscitation area.
Josephine quickly set about assessing the patient, and determining what
needed to be done right away. An intern doctor came in just then, and
the two continued the patient assessment and stabilization. She prayed
that the oxygen would be delivered before it was needed. This was just
the first of many patients, and eight hours later when her shift ended
the unit still had no oxygen. She went by the surgical emergency ward to
find the first patient lying on his back with a chest tube in place. The
left side of his face looked even more swollen and was turning black,
his left eye was not visible, and his breathing was regular but noisy. A
heavy set middle aged woman sat on the floor by his bed. Josephine asked
her how he was doing. 'He has not woken up. They say he needs a special
x-ray for his head but the machine to take the x-ray is not working. So
we have been told he needs to be taken to another hospital for that. It
will cost two hundred thousand shillings at that other hospital. We
don't have it. I have sent for my husband. I think he will be here
tomorrow.'

Josephine was familiar with this scenario. Some patients with head
injury could not have surgery unless a special brain scan -- CT scan --
had been done, and the surgeons often insisted that patients stay in
Surgical Emergency ward until the scan could be done. Mulago's CT
scanner was down more often than it was up and functioning, which meant
that very ill patients were often bundled into an ambulance or some
other form of transportation, and driven to one of Kampala's private
facilities where the CT scan could be done. There was a different fate
for patients whose relatives could not afford the scans.

\*\*\*\*

Karungi remembered a young man she met in the mall a few years back. The
young man had a stall selling curtains. Someone mentioned that he was a
doctor. She thought it was a joke. It turned out to be true. She asked
him why he chose curtains over the noble profession. 'It stopped being
noble,' he said. He recounted how, during his internship, he had lost
three babies in the same night because the Acute Care Unit had run out
of oxygen. 'I certified three deaths in one night. All three could have
survived if we had had oxygen.' 'Oxygen!' he repeated, throwing his
hands in the air. 'The mothers kept pleading for my help. I run to the
Director's office and found it locked. I run to the main theatre, not
quite knowing what I expected from there. The anesthetist told me they
had only enough oxygen for emergency operations, and he had two
caesarean sections lined up. I went back to the ward to find the third
baby gasping. The mother was wailing. I left the ward and did not go
back until the following day. By that time I had made up my mind to
either leave the country or the profession.'

Karungi herself remembered many distressing nights during which she
swore to leave Medicine altogether, but she always came back. One night
when an operation had to be postponed for lack of oxygen, the patient's
father asked her where they got the oxygen. 'A factory delivers it.'

'Yes, but where does the factory get it from? Do they import it or they
manufacture it here?'

'No. Oxygen is actually in the air we breathe, but they use special
equipment to extract it and pack it in the drums that you see here.'

The old man had kept quiet for a short while before wondering aloud. 'If
it is from the air it means Uganda cannot run out of oxygen. There is
always enough in the air for all of us. How is it that a big hospital
such as this one does not have the machine to catch it and pack it?'

\*\*\*

# The Mucky Millennium {-}

> > ~***'The present situation is appalling, not only because of the human
misery that is the measure of the crisis, but also, and perhaps more
importantly, because the group has lost the will to deal with the future
at all. Everywhere the focus has shifted from the strategic responses
which seek to lay foundations for the future ... as the best leadership
is sucked into equations of short term survival. The best minds no
longer prepare for the tasks of the future, but are engulfed in the
problems of the present. Michael Manley, 1925 -- 1997, on '*The rocky
road to a new economic order*'***~

On Independence Day 2000, while most civil servants stayed home to enjoy
the public holiday, a small band of public health specialists made their
way to Gulu in northern Uganda on an urgent mission. The issue was one
that would see the demise of hundreds of people before it burnt itself
out. Ugandans were about to be introduced to the latest reason for the
country's notoriety.

A couple living some 14 km north of Gulu town had died a mysterious
death. The neighbors chalked it down to witchcraft, and all would have
been settled, had another man that had attended the same funeral as the
deceased couple not died a short while later in a similar manner. Acute
fever, headache, vomiting blood, and bleeding from the gums. The new
community diagnosis was food poisoning at the funeral. A few more people
that had not been to the funeral fell ill with the same symptoms. Some
were bleeding from not just the gums but the nose and eyes as well. They
were taken to Lacor Hospital. Two of them died shortly after admission.
Not too long afterwards, a couple of nurses that had taken care of the
patients with the mysterious disease came down with the same symptoms.
Now, that was alarming. The head of the hospital, Dr. Matthew Lukwiya
was away at a meeting in Kampala, and he hastily returned to Gulu. He
quickly recognized that this was a hemorrhagic fever epidemic from a
highly contagious agent, very likely a virus. The race against time had
just begun.

An urgent call was made to the Ministry of Health in Kampala on 8
October 2000, and the World Health Organisation (WHO) in Geneva was
informed. A team of experts comprising of Ministry of Health staff, and
experts from the WHO and Centers for Disease Control in USA, was
dispatched the following day to assess the situation and collect samples
for analysis. Blood samples were couriered to South Africa's National
Institute of Virology in Johannesburg. A few days later, the results
were back: *Ebola*. Once again the Ugandan health workers, having been
informed of the highly contagious and rapidly fatal nature of the
disease, rolled up their sleeves, draped and gloved as required, and
went to work.

Over the next several months, more than four hundred Ebola patients
would be treated, and 224 of them would die.

In the fifth week of the epidemic Lukwiya woke up with a strange feeling
all over his body. His muscles ached in a way they had not done before.
He had been working long hours and having little sleep, so he thought
this might explain his fatigue. He dragged himself out of bed and got
ready for work. By mid-morning he was feeling so tired that he decided
he would go back home and catch up on some much needed sleep. He thought
he might be coming down with the flu, or maybe malaria. The fever could
not have picked a worse time. Lukwiya was managing a near-riot among the
health workers who were terrified of contracting Ebola, and who thought
the shifts were too long and the pay not commensurate with the risk. He
had had to lead by example, doing rounds in the isolation ward daily. On
the morning of the 27^th^ November, as he got up from his bed, he felt a
sudden wave of nausea. His heart beat raced, and he felt a
light-headedness that left him weak kneed. All this lasted a minute or
so; his head cleared, and his head stopped pounding. A nagging thought
that had occurred to him earlier became more insistent, and took on a
sinister name. Two of his nurses were in Intensive Care Unit fighting
for their lives, so Lukwiya was well aware that the Ebola risk to health
workers was very real. He had taken every precaution that he knew how,
and he could not recall any incident that had exposed him to undue risk.
Yet the symptoms that he was experiencing were unmistakable. He let Sr.
Maria and his senior colleagues know about his suspicions, and a blood
sample was taken. It returned positive and he was taken into isolation
ward. On 5^th^ December Matthew Lukwiya lost the battle against the
virus, leaving behind a team that was badly shaken by his death -- some
had been his students, most had worked with him closely as colleagues,
and many were personal friends.

On 27 February 2001, five agonizing months after the epidemic started,
Uganda was declared Ebola free.[^3], [^4], [^5] It would be another
seven years before a similar epidemic broke out, this time in
Bundibugyo, a district south of Gulu.

\*\*\*

Karungi arrived at the hospital just before 8.00 am, and headed straight
to the Accident & Emergency Department. She had been on call the night
before, and although it had been quiet, the admission ward round always
took a while with new interns. The new batch was only a week into their
surgical rotation. There was the usual mix. Burns, fractures and head
injuries from *bodabodas*, an intestinal obstruction, and old men with
enlarged prostates. With all the decisions made and the patient
transfers underway, Karungi went down to the Department of Surgery.

'Ms. Karungi, you have a guest.' The department secretary called after
her as she passed by her door.

'Who is it?'

'There was a young man asking for you. I found him here when I came in
around 7.30am. He said he is not a patient. I think it might be a
relative. He should be just outside the door.'

Just then, a young man walked in. 'There he is.'

Karungi had no idea who the young man was. 'Yes, how can I help you?'

In response, the young man reached into his breast pocket and pulled out
a brown envelope. He handed it to Karungi without speaking. Karungi
reached out for it and tore it open. She was used to patients handing
her lab results, old prescriptions, or referral notes from doctors in
upcountry hospitals, and so she was unprepared for what she found. At
first, she did not fully comprehend what she was reading until she was
half way down the single page, tore out of a child's exercise book.

> >~***'Dear Rungi, I do not think I will see you again. I am sorry to ask you
for help like this. I do not know anyone else who can help. My girl
Lydia is very bright. She always comes first in class even when she
misses school often because of my illness. I do not want her to stop
here in the village school. In many ways she reminds me of you when we
were younger. She is always reading books, just as you did. We do not
have enough books for her here. So this is my prayer. Can you find her a
bursary? Can you help her to finish school? I think if she can finish
S4, maybe she can become a nurse. Maybe one day she can even become a
doctor. I know you will try. But if you are not able to, at least I know
you will have tried. Thank you. Thank you very much. God bless you.
Biitu.'***~

The characters were all carefully formed in a large, almost childish
handwriting, with the words sitting neatly on the printed lines on the
paper. There was no date on the note.

Karungi was barely able to read the note to the end. There was a lump in
her throat, and tears were running down her cheeks unchecked. She knew
without asking. The young man stood a respectable distance away, saying
nothing. Karungi read the note a second and third time. Finally, she
looked up at the young man. 'We buried her last month. I found the
letter in her bag when I was cleaning her room out a few days ago. She
had often talked about you. I thought I would bring it.'

\*\*\*

The PG Room in the Department of Medicine was quiet. The screams of the
women in labour could be heard filtering through the windows from the
maternity ward on the fifth floor above. The occupants of PG room were
busy preparing for their exams, spread over a couple of weeks and
beginning in a few days.

'For all the mayhem that comes in its wake, the Ebola virus is really
not a successful parasite,' Namubiru broke the silence.

'Meaning?'

'It kills most of its hosts. Almost everyone who gets Ebola becomes
severely ill soon after. They die having had very few opportunities to
pass the virus on to new hosts. So it burns itself out. Compare this
with HIV. There are no symptoms, sometimes for years. That is plenty of
opportunity to pass on the virus. So in the short term Ebola wreaks
havoc, but long term it often does not impact the country as much as HIV
has. The enemy that attacks you head-on at the first encounter is less
dangerous than the one who begins by befriending you.

'That is very simplistic. The mayhem, as you call it, is often possible
because there has been a more insidious destructive force. And the
period of intense havoc is often followed by a prolonged period of slow
and uncertain recovery during which more destruction happens. The one
feeds into the other. Neither enemy is better than the other.

\*\*\*

It had been a long clinic day, and the following day was theatre day.
The list of patients to be prepared for operation was already up on the
board in the Sister's office. Francis came to the ward to pick up his
bag. He opened the door and was reaching up into the locker when he
became aware that someone was standing in the doorway. He busied himself
with his bag, slowly pulled off his clinical coat and hung it up, all
the while hoping that whoever it was would go away. He did not feel like
another patient encounter. Finally he turned around and made it clear
that he was leaving. A thin anxious looking woman he did not recognize
stood resolutely in his path.

'*Musawo*!', she started. 'Doctor!'

'*Wangi nyabo*?' 'Yes Ma'am?'

She moved closer, invading his personal space, and gently unfolded her
right fist to reveal some crumpled notes, maybe some ten thousand
shillings altogether. 'This is all we have', she said.

'What is it for?'

'For Lukwago's operation tomorrow. We have been told that the doctors in
theatre want some money before they work on his leg. Please help us!'
Francis started to protest but the woman placed the money on the table
and hurried away.

Lukwago was a sixteen year old boy with a tumour in his right leg just
below the knee. All indications were that while the tumour was malignant
in character, the disease was still limited to his lower leg. The plan
was to amputate the leg above the knee, and follow that with a short
course of chemotherapy, which would mop up any cancer cells that might
have somehow gone past the level of the amputation, although they were
not detectable at admission.

Lukwago had been prepared for theatre three times, and three times his
operation had been canceled. The first time oxygen ran out before his
turn for theatre came. The Red Firm on whose ward he was admitted had
theatre scheduled on Thursdays, so any operations that were not done for
whatever reason were usually deferred until the following Thursday. The
second Thursday that Lukwago was on the operating list a leak was
discovered in the theatre plumbing as work was just beginning. Part of
the floor was flooded with what looked and smelt like sewage, and the
sterility of the theater was breached. That day all operations were
canceled, the plumbers were called in, and after that the operating
rooms were scrubbed and fumigated to restore sterility. The third time
Lukwago was prepared all seemed destined to go well. The first two
patients were done without incident, and he was the third patient on the
list. Just before he was wheeled out of the ward there was a call from
Accident & Emergency theatre that three emergencies were lined up and
there was no anesthetist. Red Firm was requested to suspend their
non-emergency list so that the anesthetist could go and help out. He did
not return. Lukwago was yet again told the operation was to wait another
week. All this flashed through Francis' mind as he saw the lean figure
of Lukwago's mother disappear down the corridor, with her *busuuti*, the
voluminous dress common in central Uganda, swishing back and forth. He
hurried after her. He felt awful. Of course she was right to suspect
that the doctors were deliberately delaying her son's operation. Francis
knew there were health workers demanding for money to get patients onto
theatre lists. If they wanted to get a patient to pay for a service, for
instance to ensure that he got on the operating list for the following
day, the technical word was bleeding. A patient with money was said to
have a good heamoglobin level -- that one could be bled. If a patient
was perceived to have little or no money they are said to be anemic.
That meant they could not be bled, or they could only be bled using a
very small needle. Some health workers were merciless. Even if a patient
looked like they could use help themselves, as long as they were
desperate enough to get into the discussion, they could be relieved of
whatever little they still had on them.

'*Nyabo*', he called out. 'Madam'. She stopped and turned around.
Francis caught up with her. Before he could launch into all the
explanations about the delayed operation, she spoke. The words seemed to
tumble out one on top of the other. 'Lukwago's father was here
yesterday. He wanted to take the boy to a traditional healer. I refused.
Lukwago himself did not want to leave the hospital. The father left, but
said we are now on our own. If the boy dies I should not call him.'

'Of course he will be alright,' Francis declared. 'We shall operate his
leg tomorrow.' But even as Francis said this he could remember many
other times when he had given patients assurances, and had had to eat
his own words. It had been three weeks since the boy came to the
hospital. In that time, the tumour could be breaking through the thin
barriers provided by the false capsule, and tumour cells could now be
coursing through his blood, and lodging themselves in his lungs, his
liver ... his brain. In ideal circumstances, this tumour should have
been dealt with as an emergency. In Mulago these considerations always
seemed academic.

The following day Francis was in theatre bright and early. The list was
long but Lukwago was only the second patient on the list. The first
patient, a baby with a mass on his neck, was done and finished without
incident. Francis wrote the operation notes in the surgeon's room, and
was walking back to the OR to scrub for Lukwago when he overheard a
conversation that stopped him in his tracks. The Sister in Charge of the
OR was talking to someone over the phone. 'Well, if he is running a
fever then you bring the next patient on the list.'

'What?' he asked, as he turned to face the Sister. 'Who is running a
fever?'

'They say the patient for amputation has been running a fever since last
night. This morning it was 39^0^C. I have asked them to bring the next
patient -- the exploratory lap'. She marched off without waiting for
Francis' response, presumably to go and change the instrument sets in
the OR. Clearly, she was oblivious of the fact that her casual
announcement had serious consequences for the patient. The rest of the
operations were done and finished early. Francis dreaded seeing Lukwago
and his mother, but he knew he had to explain this most unfortunate
cancelation. He needed to let them get over the acute disappointment
though. He determined that the following morning would be a good time,
when the fever was controlled, and when he could explain how dangerous
it would have been to undertake the procedure in that condition.

\*\*\*

Francis noticed Lukwago's bed was empty as soon as he entered the ward.
The bed was at the far end, but one could see it from the entrance to
the ward. He was alarmed. 'God, please let him be down in the lab. Or in
the X-ray department.' He approached the empty bed. Even the beddings
were gone. In the next bed was another young man who had been on the
ward with his leg in traction for a few weeks following a fracture of
the thighbone. The two boys had struck up a friendship and spent the
time playing cards across the narrow space between their beds. Francis
did not have to ask.

'*Musawo*, Lukwago is gone. They left in the night. They did not take
the X-ray films though.' The young man pointed to the large brown
envelope that contained the films, which had come at a substantial cost
to the family, and which doctors had insisted must be done before he
could be operated. Francis thanked the boy and moved away slowly,
holding the envelope, not knowing what else to say.

He had stayed away from Katanga all these months. He had not touched
alcohol in nearly half a year. Now he suddenly knew what he was going to
do as soon as he left work. He hated this place. He needed something to
drown the accusing voices in his head. All those patients that he had
let down. He dropped Lukwago's films on top of the cabinet in the
Sister's office and headed for the Surgical Outpatient clinic where he
knew a long line of patients was already waiting. The day was just
beginning, but all he could think of now was a drink of *waragi* down in
Katanga.

\*\*\*

Registered Nurse Florence Kakayi was quiet spoken and polite to a fault.
She seemed to apologise for her very existence. Yet when it came to
work, Kakayi was tenacious. She could put needles in the tiniest, most
tortuous veins. She had the kind of unquestioning compliance to
instructions that a military officer would envy; an asset in the A&E. As
long as she was able to, Kakayi did what the doctor asked her to do. But
on the day a trailer carrying fuel overturned and caught fire somewhere
along Jinja Road, Kakayi was anything but focused. She dropped things,
forgot things, and was unusually inattentive. In frustration, Karungi
told her to apply for a transfer to the skin clinic if she wanted to
file her nails in the middle of the morning. To her utter surprise,
Kakayi burst into tears. That is when it occurred to Karungi that there
must be something badly wrong with her. She assigned an intern to
complete the procedure that Kakayi had just started, and called Kakayi
out to the Sister's Room. 'What is going on?'

'Doctor, my child is sick.'

'What is the matter?'

'She has been convulsing almost non-stop since yesterday. I brought her
to the Acute Care Unit in the night, and they have been trying to
control the fits with no success. They say she needs phenytoin. It is
out of stock in the hospital, so I need to buy it.' There was a pause.
'I have no money.' The sobs became louder. Just then, the
Sister-in-Charge came in. 'Sister, do we have any phenytoin in our
stock?'

'Ha! We have not had phenytoin for a long time. Pharmacy now only
dispenses it to Pediatrics and Anesthesia. Those are your best chances.'

Karungi was keenly aware that the burns patients from the trailer crash
were still coming in, she could see more commotion in the corridor, and
could imagine the Triage Area was extremely super busy. But for now all
she could think of was Kakayi's child convulsing away somewhere in the
hospital with no effective medication. And here Kakayi was, trying to
stay at work, with no plan for how to come by the drug that she clearly
could not afford. How was she supposed to look after this sea of
strangers when her own child's life was hanging in the balance?

Karungi invited Kakayi to go with her to the Administration Block on the
fourth floor. The two walked through the crowded waiting area, and
noticed that the Red Cross ambulance was still backed up at the
entrance, offloading more patients. They were going to have to wait. The
Deputy Director was not in. They run down the stairs to the second floor
and half run to the Main Pharmacy. Karungi went through the entrance and
waved in greeting to the dispensers, but did not give them the chance to
stop her. They did not like non-pharmacy staff coming through. She was
in luck. The Chief Pharmacist was in his office on the phone. The duo
stood in the doorway. Presently he got off the phone and asked what they
wanted. Karungi got straight to the point. Pointing to Kakayi, she
explained. 'Her child has been convulsing since last night. They need
phenytoin. We understand it is out of stock in Acute Care. I am hoping
you have some on reserve.'

'Aha! This is not how we manage our stock. If every time something runs
out on the wards you doctors come to my office ...' Karungi was having
none of that. 'Do you know what sustained convulsions are doing to that
child's brain? Do you care? How many times have you seen me walking here
to ask for medicines? This nurse is putting her life on the line daily
to treat strangers. She was at work this morning, despite the fact that
she spent the night in Acute Care Unit with her sick baby. I am not here
to tell you how to run the pharmacy -- I just want to know if you can
help her.'

'Hey! You don't need to shout' Karungi had not realized it, but everyone
had gone quiet and was looking at them.

'There might be some set aside for Private Wing. I will check' The
pharmacist motioned for them to wait in his office while he went into a
back store. In a short while he came back. 'Do you have a prescription?'

Kakayi pulled a medical form from her pocket. It was the prescription
from Acute Care unit. The pharmacist glanced at it but did not touch it.
He went to his desk, counted out the dose, and handed her the medicine.
Karungi and Kakayi thanked him, the latter most profusely, and the two
walked out. None of the other people in the pharmacy said anything as
they exited. When they got to the corridor, Kakayi started to thank
Karungi again. 'Take the medicine to Acute Care and stay with the child
till she is better,' Karungi said, before running up the stairs two at a
time to head back to the A&E.

\*\*\*

Njenga heard about the strike from his mechanic. As he closed the bonnet
of the old Toyota, he asked if Njenga was one of the doctors staying
away from work that day. 'No. Why?'

'They said on the news that the negotiations for better pay have failed,
so the doctors have vowed not to return to work.'

'Hmm...,' grunted Njenga. 'You know Mulago never closes. I am sure a few
doctors will stay on and work.' But as he drove through the hospital
gate it occurred to him that if indeed the strike was on, he would have
no junior doctors on call. Not good. The last time that happened, he had
had to do the work of the interns, and the kind of operations that he
had not done since his PG room days. He was sympathetic to the Senior
House Officers, and prayed that their pay would be increased, but he did
not hold out much hope. The government had lied through every strike
there had been about better pay and better working conditions. As far as
Njenga could see, the only thing that ever changed was the faces of the
officers lying on behalf of the government. A long line of ministers,
permanent secretaries, and directors of medical services read from the
same script. Government did not need to be creative because by the
beginning of the next serious strike, it was always a new generation of
interns, or house officers, so the lies always came across as sincere to
them. He was still thinking about this when he entered the Accident &
Emergency department. It was only 5pm yet the ward was already crowded.
An intern was bending over a patient in the corner. At least he had one
doctor to work with.

\*\*\*

The side room of Ward 4B was designed as a lab. There might have been a
time when specimens were examined here, but that time was surely long
gone. The current occupants were not lab technicians but graduate
students specializing in internal medicine. This was now PG room. The
lock on the door did not work, the windows had layers of dirt that made
the glass look glazed, and the chairs were bulky and too low for the
high workbench. The students had found stools that served them better.
Here they spent their spare time away from the ward, reading, looking at
radiographs and lab result print-outs, and discussing whatever patients
presented diagnostic or treatment challenges. One of their interesting
patients was Hasule up in psychiatry Ward 16. Every medical student for
the last one decade knew him, and he in turn knew many of the doctors.
The most intriguing thing about him was how he made things up
convincingly. Unsuspecting new students rotating in psychiatry often
believed him before they were introduced to his diagnosis.

Hasule casually referred to his recent visit to State House to meet with
the President, and his phone calls with the Inspector General of Police.
None of this was true, but how was anyone to know, when he span the tale
to explain why he was now not allowed to leave the country, and why his
passport was in the custody of the Internal Security Organisation. He
had, he would continue, dropping his voice a notch to cut off the
inevitable eavesdroppers, come across some very sensitive security
information linking the American government to the vicious oil wars in
South Sudan. The students often walked away wondering why this lucid and
fascinating man was in a mental health ward. They would soon discover
that he suffered from schizophrenia, and that the unreal world he had
created for himself was all part of the delusion of grandeur, a common
symptom of the disease. Next to Hasule was Kagunywa, the patient with a
split personality.

'A major risk factor for these mental health conditions must be working
in government. The people in Ministry of Finance regularly make up
economic figures that only they believe. When everyone else feels the
inflation, they tell us that the economy is growing with rates in double
digits. Government has been eradicating poverty successfully for
decades, yet clearly, the poor are getting poorer and more plentiful,'
Agaba, the latest resident to rotate in psychiatry said.

'The Finance guys are only spewing out what the president instructs them
to. When it comes to making things up I think our Fountain of Honor is
the worst offender,' Namubiru added.

'Sounds to me more like the Fountain of Horror ...' mused Agaba.

'To his credit I do not think he really makes things up. Maybe those
around him feel obliged to do so. I believe his problem is entirely
different. Clearly, he suffers from a classic split personality. We do
well to understand that at any one time, we are listening to one of the
personalities, and the other personality might not know, or agree with
what he is saying. When he says something that contradicts an earlier
position, he is not confused or dishonest. It is just a different
personality now speaking.' Dr. Namisi had a way of making his opinion
sound like the final word on any subject.

'Guys! You do realize that this conversation is treasonous, right?
Accusing the president of a mental health condition...' Okudi was very
averse to making any negative comments on government generally, and on
the president especially.

'Don't be ridiculous! Who does not know that the president talks out of
both sides of his mouth? The mistake that most people make is to
conclude that he is a lair. Maybe occasionally he does lie, but most of
the time the seeming contradictions are positions of different
personalities. So what is worse? To accuse him of dishonesty or to
acknowledge what should have been evident to whoever cares to educate
themselves about this distressing condition? A split personality is a
psychiatric disorder, not a crime.'

'I am out of here. When you end up behind bars I will not be coming to
see you.' Okudi picked up his clinical coat and left the room. Agaba,
Namubiru, and Namisi were quiet for a short while. The class was sharply
divided along political lines.

'Not to belabor the point, I do think that we are dealing with a
narcissistic personality disorder.' Agaba was not letting Namisi win on
this one. 'The sense of self-importance and superiority, manipulation
and use of other people, need for admiration and praise ... to believe
that you, and only you out of millions of capable adults can solve the
problems of a country.'

'It could be a secondary diagnosis,' Namisi responded, sounding only
partially persuaded. 'And he would be in good company. Many great
leaders have suffered from these very conditions.[^6] Emperor Nero,
Joseph Stalin, Abraham Lincoln, Winston Churchill, Mobutu Seseseko, ...
they all suffered serious mental illnesses. Oh. And perhaps the most
infamous of them all -- it is believed that Adolf Hitler suffered from
borderline personality disorder and narcissistic personality.'

'The problem with that thinking though, is that people excuse plain and
simple greed for political power. Leaders need to be held accountable.'
The room was again silent for a while.

'By the way, has anyone seen the new ads trying to woo tourists and
foreign investors to Uganda? I saw one on CNN. Very well done, but they
must cost a hefty sum -- both the design and airing on such a channel.'
Namubiru was eager to change the subject.

'Namubiru, where do you get time to watch CNN?'

'It was run on NTV, but someone told me it was airing on CNN as well.
Anyway, pretty cool. Pearl of Africa, gifted by nature and all that. It
makes you feel proud to be Ugandan.'

'I will throw up if I hear another person waxing lyric about Uganda
while misquoting Winston Churchill's endorsement of the country as the
Pearl of Africa. For one, it was another Englishman, Henry Stanley, who
coined the expression in the late eighteen hundreds. Churchill, to who
the phrase is wrongly attributed, came much later, and in his famous
1908 publication he merely repeated what Stanley had said.' It was
always surprising how much history Namisi could spew out, and he did not
tire of reminding his friends that he got a distinction in the subject
in high school. The information often sounded too precise for something
remembered from high school history classes of a decade earlier. But it
always checked out.

'Anyhow, whichever imperialist explorer described Uganda's natural
beauty; it does not explain why the Queen did not move the seat of her
Empire here, if the English were so impressed with it. The point was,
and remains, that this lovely corner of God's creation is at best a
source of raw materials, a reservoir of cheap and increasingly unwelcome
labour, and a brief stop for the more adventurous Europeans to soak in
the sun. That is, before the threat of malaria and other life
threatening tropical diseases reminds them of the equally beautiful but
far safer Scottish countryside. So -- the government can pour all the
money they want into fake ads made up of fake imperialist quotes, but
unless they deal with the corruption, and show genuine commitment to
growing the economy as opposed to lining the pockets of regime
supporters, every investor will run off after only a brief visit. Those
that choose to stay are thieves.' Namisi picked up his clinical coat and
said something about a teaching up in Heart Institute before leaving the
room. Agaba left shortly after.

Namubiru, now left alone, wished that her colleagues would not take
politics so seriously. Post-graduate studies were hard enough; one did
not need to spice them up with political friction with one's colleagues.
Discussions in Medicine were far more enjoyable, but lately any
discussion had a way of turning political. She had been a regular
contributor to the hot discussions, which were initially all in good
humour, but lately something had shifted. Okudi was avoiding the PG
room, and Namisi was not much fun anymore. Agaba's seat on the fence was
rocking back and forth; he would soon have to decide which way to jump.
They all took things too seriously. Namubiru tried to lighten things up
as much as possible.

\*\*\*

On Thursday 26 April 2007, Brigadier Noble Mayombo was ill enough to
accept an admission to Kololo Hospital, a private hospital in the heart
of Kololo. The doctors diagnosed acute pancreatitis, a raging
inflammation of the pancreas, a small organ in the depths of the abdomen
that makes digestive juices. The following day his condition continued
to worsen, prompting his doctors to transfer him to International
Hospital Kampala where he was immediately admitted to the Intensive Care
Unit. Here, despite the most sophisticated medical interventions that
the ICU could offer, it was evident that Mayombo's pancreas was
disintegrating and destroying other organs in the process. By Sunday 29
April 2007 he had slipped into coma and was on life-support. The doctors
were under tremendous pressure to do any and everything necessary to fix
Mayombo's health. He was only forty two years old, was among the most
powerful men in the country, and had, as far as the public was
concerned, enjoyed perfect health until the current sudden illness. He
held the very sensitive position of Permanent Secretary for the Ministry
of Defense, was the Board Chair of the New Vision Corporation, and was
known to be a close confidant of the president. He had previously headed
the dreaded Chieftaincy of Military Intelligence (CMI). There had been
talk in some circles of his being a possible successor to President
Museveni.

As though to remind the doctors that this was no ordinary patient, there
was security presence everywhere in the hospital, including the ICU
itself. There were uniformed officers in the parking lot, there were
uniformed and plain-clothes security agents in the corridors, and close
family and trusted colleagues camped at the entrance of the ICU. In the
quiet room with patient monitors beeping constantly, Mayombo lay
motionless, unaware of the drama unfolding around him. And if there was
drama in the hospital, there was even more drama outside the hospital,
with conspiracy theories flying around Kampala and beyond. 'Mayombo has
been poisoned! The doctors are trying to figure out how to neutralize
the poison,' went one of the stories. It was said that the doctors
working on Mayombo were under surveillance.

The doctors held frequent meetings in the ICU to review his status, and
to determine if anything should be changed or added. A doctor from State
House checked in constantly to get updates of Mayombo's progress. Plans
were already underway to fly him to Israel. A team at a top hospital in
Israel had been contacted, and they were waiting to receive him. Because
his condition was deteriorating very rapidly however, Israel started to
look unlikely. Nairobi was a more realistic destination. Mayombo was on
a respirator, his systems were being closely monitored, and he was on
medications to keep his major organs from shutting down. Nairobi was at
least 45 minutes away by the presidential Gulfstream, but on either end
of the flight were the most hazardous segments of the journey. He would
have to be moved to the most advanced ambulance available, and the
journey from IHK in Namuwongo to Entebbe would be rough. The first five
hundred meters from IHK in any direction alone would be a test to less
critical patients. Kampala roads, even when paved, were notoriously
narrow and irregular. An ambulance ride for the acutely inflamed abdomen
and an evolving multiple organ failure was going to be a very high risk
transfer, but IHK had considerable experience evacuating critically ill
patients. Once the decision was made, the wheels were set in motion. Aga
Khan Hospital in Nairobi was contacted, detailed consultations were
done, and evacuation plans shifted to Nairobi, at least initially.
Having done all that they could, the IHK doctors prayed that their
patient would make it to their Kenyan colleagues no worse than when he
left them.

\*\*\*

Kweete half sat and half lay on the bench outside the Heart Institute.
She was surrounded by other patients and their relatives, all
impatiently waiting for the clinic to open. The Institute was located on
the ground floor of the hospital. It was nestled between the main
operating rooms on one side, and the mortuary on the other. One giving
hope, the other taking it away. Kweete had been to the institute enough
times to know the routine. The nurses opened the door and collected the
appointment cards from the waiting patients. Their files were retrieved,
and they were then called in one by one, often depending on their order
of arrival. As they waited, the less critically ill patients often
struck up conversation. Today the topic of interest was the hospital
renovations. A gentleman that sounded very knowledgeable told the rest
that because the Queen of England was coming to attend a meeting in
Kampala, Mulago Hospital was going to get a complete face lift. A lot of
new equipment was being installed.

'New equipment will be wonderful, but unless the charges are reduced
nobody will use it. We are already paying too much money for the old
equipment. Will the charges not be higher?' an older lady rejoined.

'We hear some people do not pay. They come here with chits from State
House and they are treated free.'

The knowledgeable man was called in and the conversation changed to the
cost and quality of food at the many eateries surrounding the hospital.

'Kweetegyeka?' a nurse called from the doorway. Kweete got up, gathered
her belongings, and followed the nurse. She was relieved to see the same
doctor that had seen her the previous two times. 'How are you doing?' he
asked, signaling for her to get onto the examination couch.

She had been rather tired lately. He ordered for a new type of test
called an Echo scan. She would have to go and get it done at a private
hospital in town; Mulago's machine was not working. By the time she got
back the clinic would be closed, so she would have to return the
following week for the doctor to look at the test results. She hoped
that after the Queen's visit the hustle of looking for functional
equipment in private hospitals would be over.

\*\*\*

On Tuesday 1 May 2007, Noble Mayombo died at Agha Khan Hospital in
Nairobi, due to complications of acute pancreatitis. There were still
rumors swirling around that he might have been poisoned. They were
fueled by the brevity of his illness and the uncommon nature of the
diagnosis -- many people had never heard of pancreatitis, and there was
no equivalent in local languages. Mayombo had lived by the sword, so to
say, and many were willing to believe that he had died by the sword. He
had made enough enemies in his time as CMI chief, and his closeness to
the president and the possibility that he might be gunning for the big
office ahead of more senior aspirants meant that some people were not
entirely unhappy about his early demise. They said Noble Mayombo was the
unrepentant author of many ignoble acts. Ironically, some of the
accusing fingers pointed to the President himself, who was said to be
intolerant of political ambition, and wary of Mayombo's wit and
popularity.

\*\*\*

The news of Mayombo's death was discussed at length in the surgeons'
boardroom. The consensus was that the referral was medically
unwarranted, but politically inevitable. Had Mayombo died in a Ugandan
hospital there would have been a sense that he might have survived had
he been at a better hospital. Yet no politician was coming right out to
say that Ugandan hospitals were ill equipped, and that at least in
Mayombo's case, a better equipped facility would have been preferable to
a trip on the Gulfstream.

'In Uganda every important person who dies suddenly has been the victim
of foul play. Nobody wants to believe that they have died an ordinary
death. Mayombo was abusing alcohol for years. Why should an acute
pancreatitis be a surprise?'

'It's the odds. There are many people Mayombo's age hitting the bottle
regularly. Why should he be the one to die?'

'I think the question should be why not. If there is an afterlife, he is
now busy reuniting with those he sent on ahead of himself while he
worked as CMI Chief. Many people met their untimely deaths at his
behest.' Clearly, there were not too many tears being shed here.

'I was waiting to see how many caskets there would be at his funeral
service,' Njenga said.

'Why? Were there more deaths?'

'No, but that would complete the folly. It seems an anticlimax for
someone that routinely moved in a motorcade to be buried in one coffin
with no escorts.' And with that Njenga turned back to whatever he was
reading in his corner. It was always hard to know whether he said
certain things in jest or in earnest.

The conversation turned to the quality of health care in general. Baka,
addressing himself to nobody in particular, asked, 'So -- how are we
doing now that the ministry is safely back in the hands of doctors?'

'Safely, did you say?' Francis, who had not seemed the least bit
interested in the conversation jumped in. 'Have our fortunes been
dependent on the profession of the man or woman at the wheel? The
deterioration was clearly established before the lawyer and pilot took
the reins. Or should I say before the pilot entered the cockpit? Except
for the fact that the biggest robbery of health sector funds up until
that point happened under their watch, I do not think they were any
worse than their medically qualified predecessors.'

'Really? Are you saying you see nothing amiss in an airplane pilot being
the chief supervisor of health services? Granted, the minister need not
have a master's degree in health services management, but maybe a brush
with the profession would help. I don't think that Mukula or Muwhezi
knew which end of the syringe held the needle. Much less why it was
critical to have a working refrigerator in a health center. I can
imagine the conversation with the staff in their first week at the
ministry. Francis put on a high-pitched feminine voice. 'Mr. Minister
Sir, we are having problems maintaining the vaccine cold chain. We need
more money allocated to it; otherwise we risk another measles epidemic.'

'Cold chain? I thought you used vaccines to prevent measles. I can
imagine that chains might come in handy in psychiatry, but should health
workers not be able to restrain the kids for immunization without
resorting to chains?'

The high-pitched voice again. 'Sir, it is not a physical chain. A cold
chain is a technical term ... a kind of ... well; it is \... a manner of
speech'

'You need money to pay for a manner of speech? A theory? No wonder - I
have been told that there is a lot of wastage in this ministry!'

'Francis!' Baka interrupted the monologue. 'These were highly educated
men. They might not be doctors, but they were not dumb.'

'Yes. And a whole lot of good their brilliance has done us.' Just then,
Winnie opened the door and announced in her usual dramatic fashion,
'Guys! Do you know the entire university is on strike? What are you
doing here? You are the traitors!' If she had not become a doctor,
Winnie could have had a career in acting. She had a way of converting
the ordinary into the spectacular.

'So what are *you* doing here?'

'Getting my stuff and heading home. Those of you paid by the Ministry of
Health can carry on working. Those of us under Makerere are on strike
until further notice.'

In reality, the now-on-now-off university strikes made little difference
to the surgeons, and had no effect on the occupants of PG rooms. These
doctors could be relied upon to work around the year, no matter what was
happening elsewhere. But the latest spate of strikes had finally pointed
a finger at the medics, accusing them of weakening the otherwise unified
front by university workers in their quest for more decent pay.

'What I don't get though is why the rest of Ugandans do not rise up to
join us when we strike. Surely, it should be obvious to them that the
strikes are primarily about patients. That we are trying to compel the
government to provide better health care. But quite often what one hears
is criticism about doctors abandoning patients to die.'

'True. It is a case of the kidneys telling the failing heart that it is
the heart's problem. Soon enough the kidneys will know why the heart was
begging for help. By that time, the kidneys will be closing shop. Most
Ugandans have failed to connect the dots between doctors' welfare and
their own welfare.'

'To be fair, I think people do realise that it is not hospitals and
doctors that keep populations healthy. It is farmers and teachers; it is
city planners, and water and sewerage engineers. We overestimate our own
importance.'

'Right! Please tell me which farmer to refer you to for your prostate
problems. How many of your arthritis patients have you referred to a
city planner? The Ministry of Health is being dishonest when they say
that they are focusing on preventive medicine as an explanation for the
neglect of doctors and hospitals. In fact, they are doing neither
prevention nor care. A lot of talk, no action. It has become the
Ministry of Hype and Sick.'

\*\*\*

The weekly departmental meeting was dominated by the preparations for
the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, scheduled to take place in
Kampala in November 2007. Mulago Hospital would be the main hub in a
network of hospitals to be on high alert, should any of the guests or
service people need medical attention during the course of the summit. A
large number of local and international journalists were expected to
descend on the city, and Uganda was going to be in the glare of the
cameras. The hospital administration had asked the various departments
to make lists of the items that they needed in order to be adequately
prepared. They had all been waiting for a chance such as this. Dr.
Edward Ddumba, the Executive Director of the hospital, was chair of the
committee on emergency medical services for the entire summit. What the
government had been unwilling or unable to avail to Ugandans, they were
now falling over themselves to procure for the foreign guests. The most
important guest was going to be Queen Elizabeth, the Head of the
Commonwealth.

Francis had been quiet through the discussions. Now that the formal
meeting was over, the real debate was beginning. He started seriously
enough. 'The Queen of England is coming to town, and you would think
that it was a groom coming to get his bride. Uganda is preening her
feathers in anticipation. The President has given the nod to the
Ministry of Finance to pay for all manner of ridiculous irrelevances.
But this is no ordinary love affair. The Queen is the reigning English
monarch and head of the most dominant slave trader of the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries, coming to visit the relatives and descendants of
slaves.[^7] Does that not make for an interesting conversation?' Before
anyone would answer, Francis broke out into a chuckle. 'Picture the
president, leaning forward, clearing his voice and wearing his signature
smile.' Francis dropped his voice and put on an exaggerated Western
Uganda accent.

'Yes Your Majesty. Our country is suffering from severe human resource
shortages because of all those people who were sold as slaves by your
subjects. But we have upgraded our hospitals for your visit, in case any
of your people get a medical emergency. The head of these services is
British trained.'

Then he paused and raised his voice a notch to imitate a female with a
nasal English accent.

'No thank you, your Excellency, that will not be necessary. I understand
that neither you, nor your immediate and extended families use the local
hospitals. We have taken the precaution to bring our own medical team.'
He opened his eyes wide and tilted his head towards the invisible queen.
In a stage whisper, with a knowing smile on his face, he said, 'It's
true your Majesty, even I do not trust some of our people. Many of them
are still sleeping. As you know all my grandchildren have been delivered
in London. It is safer there.' The 'sleeping' came out as '*sleep-inj*'.

High pitched English accent again. 'Is it true, your Excellency, that
the hospital which my cousin opened at Uganda's independence 45 years
ago is still the largest in the country? If my memory serves, the
population then was less than 8 million. Now I am informed that it is
closer to 40 million.' A gentle frown formed across Francis' royal brow.
'It does get a trifle crowded in there, does it not?'

The President, now turning defensive, responded. 'Yes, it is the
largest, but we have expanded the services. We expanded the mortuary,
and we gave the hospital a new fence. A very big task that was; the
fence.' Francis spread his arms and opened his eyes wide for emphasis.
He would have carried on with the monologue, but Kitya interjected.

'On a serious note, can anyone explain why we are trying to put on a
pretense about the state of our health services? Does anyone imagine
that there is even the remotest chance that any important person could
show up here in Mulago for treatment? No!'

'Oh. So you do not want us to use the opportunity to improve our
services? There are some items that we must get now, or we can forget
about ever getting them. If we do not get the autoclaves for instance, I
cannot imagine that there will be another opportunity in the near
future. So -- forget the Queen and the foreign journalists. We must get
these things for ourselves.'

The room was quiet for a long while. Francis resumed. 'Funny. Our
ancestors were forcibly put in chains, loaded on ships and ferried to
Europe and America. Today, centuries after the slave trade was
officially abolished, we sell family land, abandon our families, and
line up for days in search of visas to Europe and America. Visas top the
prayer lists for miracles in many churches. I tell you what. If the US
embassy said that anyone willing to wear chains between here and America
would be given permanent residence once on the other side, there would
be a stampede to get into the chains.'

'Francis! What kind of mind comes up with such thoughts?'

'Oh. Now it is my mind? What about the minds of those who have robbed
the country blind, and gotten it to the point at which educated young
people dream of going to foreign countries to work as retirement home
help? What minds do those people have?'

Kaggwa gathered his books, picked up his coat and quietly left the room.
It had been hardly a month since his sister left for the USA on a
visitor's visa, but she had just informed him in jubilation that she had
already been 'fixed' at a job in an old people's home. She had a nursing
degree, but her main job since graduation two years previously had been
selling food supplements from office to office. Even working seven days
a week she had not made enough money to afford her own place. A few
short stints at private clinics had left her disillusioned by her daily
encounters with desperation, malpractice, improvisation, and lack.
Kaggwa knew that for young people like his sister, migrating to the USA
was more dignified than staying at home. Kaggwa's quiet exit was not
lost on Francis and Kitya.

'You really are insufferable!' Kitya resumed the discussion. 'Of course
neither the Queen nor the President has any illusions that the
relationship between the two countries is one based on a common
heritage. Today Uganda is a member of the Commonwealth, which is itself
a curious name since there is no common wealth between the fifty three
countries under the flimsy umbrella that covers Britain's former
colonies. Britain is said to be one of Uganda's closest development
partners -- another strange term, probably coined to avoid the more
misleading terms of 'donor' and 'aid recipient', when for a long time
Uganda has been donating to Britain. A little guilt here, a little greed
there, a respectable theatre of contracts and Foreign Service jobs. A
trade imbalance as old as the relationship.

\*\*\*

The Monday morning departmental meeting was over and many of the
surgeons were already gone. Only a handful lingered on, perhaps giving
the out-patient clinics and operating rooms time to set up for the day.

'The World Health Organization has discovered a new disease.' Kitya
announced.

'In Uganda?'

'No. It is global. But Uganda is one of the worst affected countries. In
fact we are the enviable hosts of the first ever global summit on this
condition. It is called the 'health workforce brain drain'. I am not
sure if we should be excited to host the summit, or sad that we qualify
to host it.'

'Hmm... I always wonder how venues for such meetings are determined. In
this case though, I think the organisers chose well. Uganda knows a lot
about brain drain -- she is not just one of the worst affected
countries, she has learnt how to actively promote the vice. Faced with a
leaking roof, Uganda will quickly locate the source of the leak, widen
it, and create a few other holes in its vicinity. In fact, I suspect
that during the summit our ministers will be busy cutting deals with
their wealthier counterparts on how to ship our health workers over.'
Kitya and Karungi were spurring on familiar ground.

'Guys, venues are not determined based on the prevalence of the
problem,' Baka interjected. Most global meetings on poverty, food
insecurity, pharmaceutical shortages, and even malaria are held in the
wealthy capitals of the world, far removed from the subjects under
discussion. I gather a lot of lobbying is involved to draw an important
meeting to a country. The meeting comes with jobs, money, travel, and
networking opportunities. In Uganda's case it might even precipitate
further brain drain. The success of the meeting is not judged by whether
or not it solves the problem. It is the numbers of participants, the
involvement of so-called high-level speakers and dignitaries, the
quality of the accommodation and champagne, and the images and gloss on
the final report. Besides -- does the Bible not say that to those who
have, more will be given? And that those who have not, even the little
they have will be taken away? The brain drain dilemma is totally
biblical.'

'That is why they say we are driven by emotion rather than reason. Have
you heard that some countries export skilled workers the same way we
export coffee? We deliberately grow more than we need in order to sell
it to countries that need it. So what is wrong with sending our excess
health workers out there and getting foreign currency in return? What
good is an excess of health workers here? Even if the money were to go
directly to the workers' families, that is still revenue coming into the
country.'

'Except no Ugandan has died from a lack of coffee. When that begins to
happen we shall advocate for a ban on coffee exports.'

\*\*\*

On 11 July 2010 football enthusiasts around the world were glued to
their TV sets. It had been a month of adrenaline, late nights, bets won
and lost, great excitement and the depths of disappointment, all in the
roller coaster called the World Cup. For the first time in the history
of the tournament, the African continent was playing host, and although
the matches were being played in South Africa, the rest of the continent
was acting as if it was in everyone's backyard. This was the African
World Cup and 11 July was the *grand finale*.

On the world cup final night Robert Wangoda, a surgeon and acting Head
of the Accident & Emergency Department at Mulago Hospital, was not
watching the finals. He was slouched in front of the TV at home,
unwinding from his long day at the hospital, and thinking for the nth
time that he ought to get up and make his way to bed. Then the
newsreader on *Aljazeera* said something that jolted him into full
alert. He sat up straight and tried to figure out if this was fresh
news, or if the program was recounting something from the past. The
words were clear enough but their significance took a while to sink in.
A bomb blast had just occurred at Kyadondo Rugby Club in Kampala, where,
from the news report, a huge crowd of football fans had gathered to
watch the World Cup finals. From the newsroom, the camera went to an
anchor in Kampala, who confirmed that at least two blasts had happened,
one at an Ethiopian restaurant in Kabalagala, and shortly after, a much
larger one at the rugby sportsground. It was too soon to know how many
people were injured, but the armed forces were already securing the two
venues and taking the injured to Mulago Hospital.

Wangoda's heart was racing. He could not begin to imagine what the
Accident & Emergency Department was going to be like once the Police
trucks and Red Cross ambulances started arriving at the hospital. At the
best of times, it was always a stretch when they received many injured
people all at once. There were very few health workers on night duty:
one doctor, a couple of nurses, maybe three people in the emergency
theatre. All others were available on an on-call basis. He was all the
way in Budo, some 15 kilometers away from the hospital. He dismissed the
thought of driving to the hospital in the night almost as soon as it
occurred to him. It would be unwise to go out on his own in a night like
this. He would have to wait until morning to make his way there safely.

\*\*\*

Dr. Moses Galukande was watching the World Cup finals at Humura Hotel a
short distance away from Mulago Hospital on the night of 11 July 2010.
The doctor on duty at International Hospital Kampala (IHK) called to let
him know that they had received two patients with what looked like
grenade injuries. 'Can you describe the injuries please?'

'Both men have typical blast injuries, mostly to the head and chest. I
think you want to come right away.'

Galukande asked the doctor to prepare the patients for emergency
surgery. By the time he got to the hospital there were twelve patients
waiting. It was obvious they were dealing with a mass casualty incident.
The patients talked of an explosion at the Ethiopian Restaurant in
Kabalagala, less than a kilometer away. News soon came through that
there had been an even bigger blast at the Lugogo sports ground.
Galukande activated the major incident response, and then went to
theatre to start working on the most critical patients. He would not
emerge from the operating theatre for the next 48 hours.

IHK had developed its capacity over the years to respond to mass
casualties. They had done drills regularly since the days of CHOGM three
years before. Now that hard work paid off. As soon as the mass casualty
incident was declared, other surgeons were called in. Dr. Ian Clark took
over the coordinating role, and organized hospital ambulances to go and
fetch patients from the bomb blast scenes. The main pharmacy, which was
ordinarily closed at that hour, was opened to provide the necessary
supplies. Wards were cleared of non-emergency cases. In a couple of
hours all the operating rooms were busy, as was the X-ray department.
Galukande periodically napped between cases, and he and the rest of the
medical teams did not rest until all the patients had been stabilized.
He did not dwell on the fact that had he chosen to watch the World Cup
finals at Lugogo, he would have been one of the patients.

\*\*\*

On the night of the World Cup 2010 finals Jackie was on the phone with a
former classmate who now worked at a hospital in Johannesburg. The
friend told her he had been on standby the entire duration of the World
Cup, and that the hospital had had several drills in the months and
weeks leading to the tournament in readiness for any form of mass
incident. But thankfully, he had added, nothing had happened. He said he
was looking forward to the end of the season so that everyone could
breathe easy. A short while after Jackie got off the phone someone from
Mulago called to say there had been a bomb blast at Lugogo, and that
patients were being brought to her unit. 'Could it be true?' Jackie
wondered. Within minutes a second phone call came. Jackie grabbed her
bag and coat and headed to Mulago, hoping she could sort it out in a few
hours.

Jackie was the first senior doctor to arrive at the A&E, and she found
the crowd beginning to gather. Efforts were already underway to get more
staff to come in and help. She and the Sister-in-Charge went through 3B
Emergency and cleared it of all patients that were not critical. She
then came to the triage area and helped to sort patients for theatre.
The Red Cross and Police Patrol were still bringing more patients when
she went to theatre to start on the first cases. By that time, the
hospital deputy director Isaac Ezati and anesthesiologist Cephas Mijumbi
had arrived and they took over the coordination, opening main theatre so
that more surgical teams could work. From thinking that she might be
done in a few hours, Jackie was to be in the unit for 48 hours, during
which time she operated, reviewed patients, napped between cases, and
talked to patients and their relatives in a never-ending effort to make
sense of the unfolding nightmare of death and destruction.

\*\*\*

Wangoda hardly slept. In his mind's eye he could see the draft 'mass
incident management plan' that he had discussed many times with one of
his predecessors in the unit, Mr. Isaac Ezati. They had presented it to
the Hospital Senior Management for endorsement, but it was never
approved, much less implemented. Now the document lay at the bottom of a
drawer in the office, and he wondered if anyone remembered its contents.
There had been drills in collaboration with Civil Aviation Authority,
but some of the key personnel who had participated in the drills had
since left the unit.

By dawn, he was awake and dressed. The bomb blasts were the only news on
all the radio stations. He made his way to the hospital, and before he
reached the third floor on which the A&E was located, he could see that
there was major drama. His fears were confirmed when he approached the
entrance to the unit. For the first several minutes, he could not enter
because of the crowds. It seemed like half of Kampala had come to the
hospital. There were people everywhere --around the Police Post, in the
parking, the ambulance bay, and crowding the entrance to the A&E. There
were some Police officers trying to control the crowds, but they did not
seem to be having much success. People were crying, shouting into their
phones, shouting at the health workers, or huddled in small groups. The
chaos was unbelievable. He found patients lying on the bare floor, and
he spotted nurses and some interns trying to put up IV lines on patients
in the corridor. Some people were bending over patients, probably to
comfort them, but equally likely to see if they knew them. It was hard
to know which of these people swarming the A&E were being helpful and
which ones were in the way. He stood in the middle of the triage area
and called everyone to attention. Initially nobody paid him any
attention, but after a while, there was some lull in the noise levels.
'Everyone, listen! We know you are all anxious to see your relatives and
friends treated. We are equally anxious to do our work, but the doctors
and nurses are not able to work on anyone with you crowding here. If you
insist to stay here, we shall have to sit and wait. If you want us to
work we kindly request that you all go outside. If you do not work in
the A&E please go and wait outside. As soon as we are able to provide
more information we shall pass it on.' People started to file out.

Someone had gone to the Nurses' Hostel and asked the student nurses to
come and help. They came. They were the main hands in all the areas --
cleaning, putting up IV lines, preparing patients for procedures,
talking to relatives and trying to help people find their relatives ...
but many of them were also very new to nursing. Patients were dying, and
the bodies would quickly be moved aside to make room for other patients
to be assessed and managed.

The bulk of the injuries were to the head, neck and chest, confirming
reports that the bomb had detonated a short distance off the ground into
a largely seated crowd. There were relatively fewer injuries in the
lower parts of the body. The head surgeons were going to be very busy.
For the moment though, most of what was needed was order, efficient and
continuing prioritization of the patients' needs for resuscitation and
surgery, and plenty of space in which to lay out, examine, and treat
patients.

Perhaps the most enduring memory of the second night for Jackie was
coming out of theatre to run into a friend who was looking for her
sister, who she was convinced had been at Lugogo Sports ground. The
friend had looked through the ward and had not found the sister. She
asked Jackie if it was possible to go and look in the morgue. 'I think
so,' Jackie responded. The friend begged Jackie to accompany her there.
'Look, I have my hands full. But go on, I am sure someone over there
will be able to help.' The friend would not leave Jackie alone, and her
distress was hard to ignore. Jackie excused herself and ran down the
stairs with the friend to go and show her where the morgue was, past
Ward 1C. On reaching there, the place was busy despite the hour. Even
years later, Jackie could remember what happened. 'We went inside. It
was awful. ... Just awful. Row upon row of bodies. Dismembered bodies
... her sister was there. She had lost a leg. We came away numb. I had
no time to mourn with her. I had to get back to theatre.'

Towards morning, Jackie came out of theatre and sat in her office, put
her feet up on a chair and tried to get some rest. An hour later, around
6.30 am she got up and the team started rounds to see who could be
moved, and to carry on working. That morning a plane arrived from South
Africa to evacuate some Americans who had been injured in the bomb
blast, to take them to Johannesburg. In the meantime, the usual work of
the unit did not stop. Road traffic crashes were still happening out
there, children were still being burnt, hernias were still strangulating
and coming to Mulago for care. It was the most stretched that the
doctors could remember being. Day 2 went by and the roller coaster of
patient assessment, care and loss continued. There were now a number of
surgical teams with the specialists taking care of their patients --
head injuries, eye injuries, some extremity injuries -- it was a lot to
work through.

On the third night, Jackie and Wangoda were finally able to go home. 'I
got home and slept because I was so exhausted. It was more like blacking
out,' Jackie recalled. 'I remember weeks later Dr. Margaret Mungherera
came and tried to give us some psychosocial support -- a debrief of the
days following the bomb blast. We had not sat down to process what had
happened to our patients, and to us. We were all traumatized. Some of us
had worked in A&E for years, but that experience was different. And what
about those poor student nurses who were seeing all those dead bodies
... and nobody told them how to feel or what to do? Maybe some left the
training in shock. The hospital should have set up a corner right away,
to help medical workers to deal with their emotions. Mungherera told
people it was okay to cry, to feel angry, and to talk about our emotions
so that we could work through them. But this debrief was happening weeks
after the event. The Police had reported that over seventy people died
from the bomb blasts. I do not know how many people I saw die over those
two days.'

\*\*\*

The Department of Surgery Board room was quiet. Over time, the room had
morphed into office space. As more surgeons completed their training and
left the PG room for the next group, the pressure for office space in
the department became more intense. Initially surgeons shared offices,
but that too became impractical beyond three surgeons per office. Some
started to use the Board Room for the short periods between theatre and
clinics, or while waiting to teach a class. Eventually the Board Room
morphed into an open concept office that many young surgeons found
convenient. It was here that the former occupants of PG room now took
refuge. In the absence of a board, someone had put up a flipchart stand.
But the magic of PG room was missing. The flipchart was used only
infrequently, and mostly to illustrate a point during formal meetings.

\*\*\*

Francis had been gone for most of the day. The top sheet on the corner
flipchart was clean. The silence was broken by Njega in his
characteristic detached style. Without turning around to address anyone
in particular, he asked, 'I suppose you guys have heard that Entebbe
Grade A has finally been annexed to State House?' Silence. 'All the
health workers there are being moved to Grade B,' he continued. Njega
had some attachment to the Entebbe hospitals, having worked at both of
them sometime in his earlier years.

'What do you mean, 'finally'?'

'It has been long in coming.'

Entebbe municipality in Wakiso district had for decades boasted of two
hospitals only a few hundred feet apart: Entebbe Hospital Grade A and
Entebbe Hospital Grade B. The names were left over from the colonial
past, when whites did not share hospital space with blacks. The finer
services available at grade A were inaccessible to the blacks whose
facility was appropriately named grade B. Very subtle. But that was
several decades ago, and any rational planning would have seen the two
modest sized facilities merged and expanded to serve the ballooning
population. For some reason they had been kept separate.

There had been talk in the press about the attempted take-over of the
hospital but it had not been conclusive. It was often unclear whether
the hospital was being taken over by State House, or the UPDF. The
ambiguity was characteristic of the wide grey zone that involved the
President's Office, the official residence of the current Head of State,
and the military. The three institutions seemed to have over time merged
to the point where it was hard to tell one from the other. Resources
meant for one often ended up in the other, and each of them had
so-called classified expenditures whose main purpose was to probably
avoid scrutiny and to confound audits.

'So, one family has appropriated for themselves a hospital that served
an entire district? Folks, that is not wisdom. Poor people pray. When
they realise that their hospital has been taken over by a family that
could see any doctor in the country without leaving their home, they
will pray. Their ailments will be transferred to the new occupants of
their hospital. The people in that compound will suffer from strange and
extraordinary diseases.' As always, Winnie saw a spiritual angle to the
problem.

'Of course State House is not about one family. It is an institution. If
they do maintain it as a hospital it will serve many people.'

'Right', Winnie retorted. 'It is an institution dedicated to the service
of one family. The ground on which the hospital stands has not moved.
The walls of State House have moved around it. Why did they not simply
create a gate in their wall allowing access to the hospital? The whole
thing stinks of selfishness and a complete lack of respect for the tax
payers of Wakiso district who now have to travel longer distances in
search of health care. Here is the irony. The First Lady is the champion
of Safe Motherhood, the Patron of the Uganda Women's Efforts to Save
Orphans ... and a few other titles that speak of a commitment to
improving people's health. That the First Family forcefully and
violently closes the doors of a hospital in the face of the people is
most bizarre. Politicians usually want to be known for building
hospitals, not closing them down.'

\*\*\*

> > ~***In 2002 the Ministry of Defense and State House commenced plans to take  
over Grade A Hospital located in Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso District.  
The news sparked resistance from Wakiso District leadership. The  
hospital served as the primary medical facility for more than 100,000  
people, and was especially key for the care of over 4000 patients on  
treatment for HIV. The district had instituted a cost sharing scheme at  
the facility and significant revenues were coming into the district  
coffers regularly. Wakiso mounted a serious pushback, and the take-over  
plans seemed to have been abandoned. As it were, the tree had been cut  
and the stump left for dead, but the rooting system was intact. In 2011  
the take-over plans resurfaced. The grab was imminent. After a series of  
exchanges in which it became apparent that the hospital would be taken  
over by the army, the district leadership staged a street demonstration  
against the move as a last ditch effort. The Police and army came out  
with tear gas and live ammunition. In the scuffle that ensued, the  
district chairperson was arrested and several people were injured and  
arrested. The unpleasant episode was widely reported in the local media  
and the topic eventually came to the floor of Parliament. When the State  
Minister for Health was questioned about the hospital, first she said  
that she did not have sufficient information, and then contradicted  
herself by saying that the Ministry had no plans to give away the  
hospital. In a subsequent statement she said that the government planned  
to turn the facility into a trauma and VIP treatment centre, which is  
why they were evacuating it. It was not lost on the district leadership  
that the take-over plans had emerged at the time that State House, whose  
grounds were adjacent to Grade A Hospital, was undergoing extensive  
renovation. Clearly, the intention was for the State House grounds to be  
extended to absorb the hospital. The demonstrators should have saved  
themselves the tear gas, as the take-over plans were already in motion,  
well away from nosy journalists. A letter dated 22 August, 2011, and  
signed by the Ministry of Health's Permanent Secretary, instructed the  
hospital management to evacuate the facility and hand it over, not to  
State House, and not to some contractor that was going to build the  
trauma center, but to the UPDF Special Forces Unit. "I wish to inform  
you that Ministry of Health agreed to hand over Entebbe Grade A Hospital  
to the Special Forces at the time of completion of State House  
rehabilitation," the letter read in part. On the 21st of October 2011,  
the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Health called the hospital  
superintendent and instructed him to execute the hand-over on the 1st of  
November.***~

That there were challenges with the delivery of medical care in the
country was not news. After years of paying it only lukewarm attention,
and blaming health workers for all that was wrong, in 2010 President
Museveni decided to act. He created a new entity in State House, the
Medicines and Health Service Delivery Monitoring Unit, and appointed his
personal physician, Dr. Diana Atwine to head it. A specialist clinician,
Atwine had no known experience in the management of health services.
This did not deter her from taking on her new role with missionary zeal.
Despite government's perennial and severe under-investment in the system
that Atwine was being asked to monitor, her office was given enough
money to enable her to crisscross the country apprehending health
workers, and dragging some of them into police stations for various
alleged transgressions. Where the ministries of health and local
government jointly charged with the quality of health care were starved
of resources, and health workers were going for months without pay,
Atwine's outfit had offices and staff, vehicles and drivers. The
Ministry of Health had a Department of Quality Assurance whose mandate
Atwine now took over. She was media savvy. In one dramatic appearance
before the Parliamentary Health Committee, Atwine gave a riveting
account of a collapsed health care system: 'In Kamuli `[hospital]`, a
brand new X-ray machine has been kept in a box for the last 12 years. In
Kyanamukaka, Masaka, the hospital staff turned the `[operating]` theatre
into a store `[for sorghum]`. In Masindi, two doctors had all the
facilities `[they needed]` but could not operate on patients because
they didn't know how it is done.'

The revelations went on and on. '... sixty per cent of the facilities
visited had expired drugs, 69 per cent of the In-charges of government
hospitals were absent, the patients were being treated by `[only]`
junior doctors. ... Then there is the problem of forged accountability.
This is an everyday activity. Everywhere I go, people are stealing money
and `[giving]` false accounting. The biggest problem is extortion right
from Mulago National Referral Hospital to the lower units. Most health
facilities we visited were non-functional yet they had all the
facilities, including theatres. In Jinja hospital, interns extort money
openly and it is acceptable. The issue is not `[lack of]` money; it is
the uncoordinated activities, negligence and wastage in the system. We
are the problem.'

The media loved it. The Ministry of Health officials were squirming in
their seats. A section of the medical fraternity were skeptical of
Atwiine's work methods, and many were outright upset. If she wanted to
help them, why was she not telling the country how poorly paid the
medical workers were, or how ill equipped most facilities were?

It would not be long before the tables turned, and the watchdog became
the provider. Then she would have the opportunity to rectify all the
ills she had identified in the system.

\*\*\*

The cafeteria on the sixth floor of the hospital next to the Interns'
Mess had become popular as a lunchtime meeting place. Senior House
Officers had their meals here, and it was an opportunity to catch up
with friends, and to find out what was going on in the hospital beyond
one's immediate responsibilities. It was probably the only time
different disciplines sat together in one place. Most conversations were
related to patients and the welfare of the doctors, but occasionally the
discussion turned to politics. The subject turned to the difficulties of
getting home late at night for doctors on call.

'Amin had solved that problem. He gave all doctors from the registrar up
personal cars.'

'True. And then he made the country so insecure that the doctors could
not drive the cars at night! He gave with one hand and took away with
the other.'

'Obote did not give doctors any cars, but most doctors seemed to have
fared well, at least during Obote I. The medical facilities were
better.'

'Well, he and Amin actually used the services of this hospital. Obote
was operated here. He was not afraid to go under anesthesia in Mulago.'

'Why would he fear? Surgeons are not assassins. One does not go to
school for decades and swear oaths like we do to become an assassin. For
that, one goes to the armed forces and learns how to shoot a gun. I
don't know how long it takes to become an expert marksman, but it
certainly takes a whole lot more skill to repair the human body than to
make a hole in it.'

'So much for your vain skill. We are talking about the destiny of a
nation. Here was a man who was poised to plunge the country into the
abyss, and who indeed did, and all you can say is that the surgeons of
the day exercised their skill? Nobody was asking them to be serial
killers. They could have taken out just the one man.'

'One man? Is it ever just one man? If you think by putting one man out
of action, no matter how evil you might perceive him to be, that you
would prevent the country from going down the abyss as you say, then you
are even more naÃ¯ve than I thought. During the Roman occupation of
Israel, high priest Caiaphas thought the same. He is reported to have
famously said of Jesus the Nazarene, that it was better for one man to
die, than for the entire nation of Israel to be destroyed.[^8] They
arrested Jesus and hanged him after a kangaroo court found him guilty
of, of all things, equating himself to God.[^9] More than two thousand
years later, we are still dealing with the fallout of that ill-advised
crucifixion. So -- we might have suffered under Obote, but there is no
guarantee that we would have fared better had he been assassinated back
then. All I can say is that to his credit, he had invested in the health
service enough that when he needed an emergency operation he could find
it in the local hospital. Mulago had decent infrastructure for its day,
and it boasted of well trained professional staff; that is what saved
his skin. Or rather, his jaw and his life.

\*\*\*

'Today I had the privilege of witnessing the First lady's convoy pushing
a hoard of school children into a trench. It was quite impressive.' Baka
sounded unusually upbeat.

'There you go again. What is impressive about that?'

'Well -- for starters, the good lady needs no less than fourteen
vehicles to get around. The thirteenth is an ambulance and the
fourteenth is the infamous toilet on wheels. She will not be counted
among the 32% Ugandans with no access to a latrine. And if you are
familiar with Gadhafi Road as it plunges into the valley from Makerere
Hill road, you will know why the kids had to dive into the trench.'

'Her fuel bill must be something to behold. We had better hurry up and
get that oil flowing.'

'Funny, that the First family is moving around in huge convoys that
include ambulances, and they have found it necessary to annex a whole
hospital to State House. Someone needs to tell them the folly of what
they are doing. If something were to happen to one of them, and they
needed a lifesaving procedure, do they really believe that their army of
handlers could stop that convoy, safely move the patient into the
ambulance, stabilize them, and then airlift them to Germany for the
procedure? A death certificate is final; it does not matter where it is
written.'

'If I were the President or the First Lady I would always travel in the
ambulance itself.' Njega had not even turned around. It sounded as
though he was talking to his book in the corner.

\*\*\*

The Monday morning departmental meeting was over. There had been one
main agenda item -- the shortage of surgical sutures. For weeks now some
surgical procedures had been put off, or had been done with substandard
sutures. Reports from Obstetrics said that mothers going for caesarian
section were buying their own sutures on the open market. In some cases,
the results were catastrophic. The Hospital Director had issued
instructions that no doctor should ask a patient to buy sutures. It was
a tough choice -- use what there was or stay out of theatre. There was
only one type of suture, mostly used in children or on delicate tissues.
It was inappropriate for most adult surgery. The meeting ended without
any solution, and the Head of Department promised to revisit the matter
with the Hospital Director. Surgeons started to disperse. Njenga had an
outpatient clinic to run, but it never really got started any earlier
than 10am because of the time it took for the records clerks to get all
the files organized, and the patients sorted out. There was no rush. He
was beginning to turn away from the table when a headline on the
*Monitor* in the middle of the table caught his attention. 'Uganda
government takes Sh 1.7 trillion for jet fighter.'

'Wait! Is this today's?'

'Yes, the paper is today's. But it is old news. From the story, the
money was taken a while back, and the purchase is only now coming to
light.'

'US\$720 million. That is serious money.'

'Yup! We could be swimming in top notch sutures forever.'

'We could be swimming in better salaries too.

> > ~***In April 2010, as the country readied itself for the general elections,  
a leading Russian business daily, *Vedomosti*, reported that Uganda had  
signed a contract with Moscow to buy Su-30-MK2s fighter jets at Shs654  
billion. At the time the army spokesperson denied the reports. At the  
height of the campaigns for the February 2011 general elections though,  
President Museveni asked Parliament to approve an emergency  
supplementary budget of Shs600 billion from the central bank. It was  
labelled a classified expenditure, putting it beyond scrutiny. On 23  
March 2011, a month after the election, President Museveni invited the  
Members of Parliament belonging to the ruling NRM party to State House  
for a nighttime meeting. The agenda was not disclosed until the meeting  
commenced. The President told the MPs that government needed US\$740  
million (about Shs1.7 trillion) from Bank of Uganda to buy fighter jets  
and other military hardware. He said the country needed to acquire the  
jets and other equipment to beef up the capacity of the UPDF. On  
inquiring about the urgency, and why it could not simply be put into the  
budget for the following year, it turned out that the money had in fact  
already been spent, and the Executive would be asking the Parliament to  
approve it retrospectively. The President was therefore asking the  
ruling party MPs to support the request when it was presented. Because  
military purchases were considered classified, it was not possible,  
either before or after the purchases, for Parliament to verify the  
expenditures. For the total approved annual budget the Shs1.7 trillion  
was equivalent to the infrastructure and health budgets combined. The  
budget performance report for the financial year 2010/11 showed that  
Security and State House supplemental budgets increased the budget by  
30%. Each of the two supplemental budgets (Shs600 billion and Shs. 1.7  
trillion) far exceeded the 3% limit stated in Section 12(1) of the  
Budget Act 2001, this being supplementary expenditure for which the  
Executive can seek retrospective authority from Parliament. The anomaly  
had no precedent in the history of the legislative body.***~

The casualties began to arrive at the Accident & Emergency around
11.00am. Dr. Wangoda had heard that there were confrontations between
the Police and opposition politicians and their supporters engaged in
walk-to-work demonstrations. They were supposed to be peaceful but they
had turned violent. One of the first patients to arrive was a nurse.

'I was walking to work when the Police started to throw tear gas
canisters at people in front of me ...'

The intern doctor interrupted her. 'Why do you people involve yourselves
in these things?'

'I was not involved. As I said, I was walking to work ...'

'Precisely! Did you not hear the Police warning that anyone engaged in
walk-to-work demonstrations would be arrested?

'But doctor, how were people who usually walk to work supposed to get
there today?' the now agitated patient asked. 'Will the Police transport
us to work?'

'Oh. Do you mean to say you were on your way to work ...?

'Yes. On foot. That is what I have been trying to say. I live in Nangabo
and work at the Kasangati Health Center. I was approaching the Health
Center entrance when the Police threw tear gas canisters at the people
ahead of me. I saw a pregnant woman drop to the ground. I rushed to help
her up. One of the policemen ran to where we were and started to hit
both of us. I managed to drag the woman towards the Red Cross ambulance
that was parked close by. I was helping her into the vehicle when I felt
something hit me in the leg. A severe pain shot up and down my leg and I
felt the leg give way under me. I collapsed and half rolled under the
ambulance. When I looked down at my leg, it was bleeding. A Red Cross
volunteer pulled me into the ambulance.'

The patients kept coming. Most of them were brought by the Red Cross
ambulances, but some came on Police Patrol pick-up trucks. With the
arrival of the patients came journalists and various types of security
personnel, some overt and others covert. By afternoon the Accident &
Emergency department looked like a field hospital in a war zone. In
addition to the many demonstrators who had been assaulted by the Police,
there were patients from the health center who suffered acute exposure
to tear gas. More than twenty school children from a roadside school
were coughing and hysterical after a couple of canisters exploded in
their classroom. A pregnant woman delivered in one of the Red Cross
ambulances, and the procedure was completed by one of the A&E nurses
with the ambulance parked outside the Accident & Emergency Department.

At Kasangati the ambulance driver was beginning to ease the vehicle out
of the roadside spot where he and the crew had been waiting for
casualties when a part of the crowd of demonstrators started running
towards him. They were half dragging and half carrying someone in a
checked blue and white shirt. The driver put on his brakes and waited.
The air was thick with dust and tear gas. One of the Red Cross
volunteers opened the ambulance door and jumped out. As the men got
closer the driver could see who the casualty was - Besigye. He was
covered in dirt from head to toe and bleeding from his hands, which he
held close to his chest. There were already three injured young men on
board but there was certainly room enough for the man at the center of
the demonstrations. As soon as he got in the First Aider banged the door
and the ambulance shot off in the direction of the city. The driver and
crew were accustomed to violent confrontations between demonstrators and
the security forces, but this was special. The ambulance found itself in
the heart of a motorcade of heavily armed security vehicles with a
*mamba* in the rear, and they were keeping up with the ambulance's
speed. As they approached Mulago Hospital, Besigye who had been quiet
suddenly spoke up. 'I am not going to Mulago.'

'That is where we take all the patients.'

'I am not going to Mulago.' He repeated the statement matter-of-factly,
raising neither his voice nor his blood soaked hands. For someone that
had just been shot he kept his composure. 'Please take me to Kampala
Hospital.'

The driver up front either did not hear, or ignored the request.
Presently he pulled up at the Mulago Hospital Casualty Department
entrance with the Police patrol trucks in tow. The other patients were
taken out of the vehicle. Besigye did not budge.

'Let's go to Kampala Hospital,' the First Aider said, as he banged the
door closed.

\*\*\*

The Department of Medicine's PG room was quiet. There was a curious
writing on the flipchart at the front of the room:

On 12 May 2011 the following will happen:
  
  1.  20 Ugandan women will die of pregnancy related conditions
  2.  One third of all Ugandan children below 5 years will go to bed
      hungry.
  3.  One-third of under-fives (2.4 million) will be stunted and more than
      1 million will be underweight.
  4.  130 Ugandan children will die of malaria, pneumonia, diarrhea,
      malnutrition, or other preventable childhood illnessesÂ 
  5.  Millions of young Ugandans will roam the streets and villages in
      search of jobs, but they will not find them
  6.  More than half of Uganda's 20 million children will be living in
      poverty - deprived of the things that enable them to thrive -- food,
      shelter, clean water, sanitation, education and information.
  7.  State House, the official residence of the First family, will spend
      UGX164 millions on food and drinks
  8.  Mr. Museveni will be sworn in as President for the fifth time. The
      event will cost Ugandan tax payers 3.3 billion shillings.

Is this what you voted for?

'There must be something in the water at State House. Every occupant of
that address for the last 30 years seems to have had mental health
problems,' Agaba commented.

'What do you mean, the last 30 years? There has been only one occupant
in that period.'

'Exactly my point. Even if someone was mentally very robust, if you put
them in State House and President's Office, where they have a sea of
praise singers, unlimited power over the country's tools of violence,
unfettered access to national resources, and if this goes on for more
than a decade, they will begin to believe they are a special kind of
being.'

'Maybe they are a special kind of being. What is the cause, and what is
the effect? I do not think ordinary individuals organize an army and
fight a bush war for five years to get to power. So - we started off
with someone that had unusual focus on power through violence. We
subjected him to extreme hero worship for a long time and we created a
power monster. The tendency to split personality probably predated the
bush war, and has found full expression in the current environment.' In
Namisi's mind the diagnosis was no longer a matter of debate.

'The moment we say that an individual's behavior is the result of a
disease we absolve them of all responsibility. I am not sure I am ready
to do that with regard to politicians. Besides, you base your
conclusions on the study of just one individual. That is hardly
credible.'

'Granted. But we can draw in a few more people to get a decent sample.
Amin used violence to get to power. His use of state power run into
early opposition here and abroad because he did not take the time to
co-opt enough people with sufficient greed and sophistication to keep
him in power. Obote had the time, and indeed the support of enough
people, but he lacked the personal discipline to keep on top of the
machinery of violence. There are many reasons for his fall, but the
bottle was his ultimate undoing. For a leader to drink to intoxication
on a regular basis is to court disaster. Tito Okello is hardly worth
mentioning. He jumped onto a run-away horse despite having zero skill in
horsemanship. He was doomed from day one. So -- yes, we have a small
sample but we can expand this beyond Uganda. You examine every person
who has been head of state for more than 30 years in the last 60 years.
They are all, without exception, greedy violent men that surrounded
themselves with educated, greedy, and selfish people.'

\*\*\*

> > ~***In April 2012 junior Finance minister Matia Kasaija presented Parliament  
with a request for supplementary funding of Shs555.78 billion to finance  
'emergency activities'. That would increase the 2012/13 budget from  
Shs11.4 trillion to Shs11.9 trillion. There were interesting details in  
his request. State House was asking for an additional Shs138.1 billion  
in "emergency" spending, more than twice what had been approved in the  
main budget. While this would bring the total cost of State House to  
187.1 billion, the budget for health would be Shs 44.2 Billion, less  
than one quarter of the State House budget. Defense which had the lion's  
share at Shs555.2b would get an additional Shs43b, bringing the total to  
Shs598.2b. Some of the unforeseen and now emergency State House  
expenditures included payments for special meals and drinks, welfare and  
entertainment, donations, utility payments, newspapers, stationery, and  
the President's increased travels. It also included more than Shs500  
million for legal fees in a London court, where President Museveni had  
been sued in his private capacity for a matter not concerning affairs of  
the State. Opposition Members of Parliament's efforts to block the  
request were unsuccessful.***~

> > ~***The President's spokesperson Tamale Mirundi said the escalation in State  
House spending was reasonable: "The President's activities cannot be  
restricted. We have a working President and he visits all parts of  
Uganda. Where is the wastage in the State House Budget? The money is  
always accounted for and this explains why the MPs approve every year.  
The donations are not for Europeans, they are for Ugandans."***~

Kampala Hospital was under siege. There was a close-knit ring of
soldiers around the perimeter, and they were not being subtle. There
were more soldiers in the parking lot and in the corridors. Besigye was
moved from the ambulance onto a trolley and straight to a resuscitation
area where he could be examined and emergency care commenced. The
entrance to the room was guarded by security operatives despite
protestations from the hospital staff that they were interfering with
the patient's right to privacy and the health workers' free movement.
The subsequent trips to the X-ray department and the operating room were
likewise closely guarded. For a patient that had come to the hospital of
his own volition aboard an ambulance, Besigye ended up in some form of
custody within the private facility. Some health workers later revealed
that soldiers were inquiring into the nature of the injuries, and what
the likely outcomes might be. They wanted to know the identity of the
surgeons in the operating room, reminiscent of the Idi Amin days when
doctors were killed or had to flee the country for doing their work.

\*\*\*

Nankya knew the baby was due anytime now. She had been warned about
having the baby without the help of a midwife, so she moved back to her
mother's home which was only a short distance from a health center. And
as though that move was the cue the baby needed, the following night she
went into labour. She woke up the mother, and they got their neighbor
who operated a *bodaboda* to take them to the health center. As it
turned out, getting there was the easy part. A guard at the center led
them to the maternity ward, which seemed to be the only place open at
that hour. A midwife was seated at a table. She did not get up.

'Is this your first baby?'

'No. My second.'

Did you deliver the first one normally?'

'Yes.'

The midwife pointed Nankya to a bed and told her to get out her 'mama
kit'.

'*Mamakiti*?'

'Yes. Do you not have the mama kit?' Nankya had no idea what this was
about. She had been told to bring a plastic sheet, and she had it in her
bag. It was from her first baby's delivery nearly two years ago, but she
had washed it thoroughly and kept it carefully, knowing it would be
needed again. She reached into her bag and pulled it out, and held it up
for the midwife to see. She also took out the roll of cotton wool that
she had put aside for just this moment.

'Yes, I can see the '*kaveera*'. But where is the mama kit?

By now Nankya's contractions were getting intense, and she was having
difficulty staying still. The midwife was still seated at the table, and
talking loudly enough for everyone in the ward to know that she did not
have the *mamakiti*, whatever that was.

'*Nyabo*! Madam! What kind of man sends his wife to the hospital to
deliver without a mama kit? I am not responsible for that pregnancy!
What do you expect me to use?' She got up and moved to the bottom of
Nankya's bed.

She turned to Nankya's mother, who was standing at Nankya's bedside.
'*Nyabo*, did your daughter not attend the antenatal clinic? Was she not
told about the mama kit? You need to go and buy gloves, a razor blade,
syringes, spirit, and gauze.' She walked back to the table, wrote
something on a piece of paper, and handed it to her with a flair of
finality. There! And with that she marched back to her table and pulled
out what looked like a crotchet set, and got to work. In all this she
did not so much as put a hand on Nankya's belly, now in full riot gear.
The searing pain was becoming unbearable. She felt like her lower back
was being ripped apart. She was determined not to scream, but she felt a
guttural sound escape from her throat, as though it was from someone
else. '*Musawo nnyamba!'* 'Nurse! Help!' The midwife did not leave her
table. The mother stopped at the ward door very briefly, looked back at
Nankya, and stepped out into the darkness. Nankya was too engrossed in
her pain to think coherently about the mother now out there looking for
a pharmacy in the night. After what seemed like hours of absolute hell,
punctuated by wails that got weaker and weaker, Nankya suddenly felt
something give way somewhere between her lower back and her pelvis. She
felt a warmth spreading down her back. She managed another wail. The
woman in the next bed called out to the nurse, who this time walked
over, an impatient look on her face. That look changed the instant she
looked at Nankya's perineum.

\*\*\*

Nankya's mother found the *bodaboda* man still waiting at the gate. She
asked him to take her to a drug shop. The man did not seem surprised.
Maybe this happened often, that he brought patients here in the night,
and ended up driving around looking to purchase medical supplies. They
drove to a nursing home in the trading center. The nurses at the nursing
home had most of what she needed, but she did not have enough money to
buy all the items. She was going to have to wait until morning when she
could borrow the rest. The first suggestion of dawn was beginning to
appear when she got back to the health center. She hastened to the
maternity ward. As soon as she entered the ward she noticed that there
was some kind of curtain around Nankya's bed. She thought the baby had
arrived while she was gone. But as she got closer she could hear Nankya
groaning. The nurse was nowhere in sight. She came closer, and put her
head against a space in the curtain where she could see Nankya, and she
saw that her belly was still distended, but was now covered with a green
sheet that went down to her feet. She was lying on her side, and the
foot of the bed was elevated. She was still wondering what all this
meant when the nurse returned.

'*Nyabo*. Your daughter delayed to come to the health center, and now
she has problems.'

'What problems?' Nankya's mother was alarmed.

'Her waters broke, and the baby's arm came out. She cannot push the
baby. She needs to have an operation to remove the baby. But here at the
health center we do not do operations. She must go to Masaka hospital
immediately.'

Nankya's mother felt a wave of panic wash over her. Masaka! How were
they going to get there? Was her daughter going to survive? What about
the baby? She had heard of stories from Masaka hospital, and most of
them were not good. The midwife had returned to her place at the table.

'How are we going to get to Masaka?'

'I am trying to get the ambulance. It had a problem last week but I
heard that it was fixed. If it is able to move you will have to pay the
driver and buy fuel. The guard has gone to call the driver.'

'Pay the driver. Buy fuel...' Even if the vehicle was available, they
might not go. What money she had was already spent on buying gloves and
other supplies. Fuel was not something she had ever had any reason to
buy. How much would it cost?

The night nurse completed her shift and left as soon as the day staff
showed up. In her hand-over she told the day nurse that the ambulance
driver had not come and the patient was weak. If the driver could be
found, they then needed to contact the health center In-Charge, who was
the only official able to approve a trip for a patient that did not have
any money. By this time Nankya was barely able to talk. She was lying in
a pool of amniotic fluid mixed with blood. The intermittent labour pains
that had intensified with every contraction had given way to a
continuous pain that seemed to involve every fiber of her body below the
umbilicus. Her breath was labored and her thoughts were getting wooly.
The mother sat on a little mat by her side and periodically wiped the
cold sweat off her forehead.

\*\*\*

Dr. Karungi was asked to review a patient that came through the annual
medical camp at the Kampala Baptish Church. What had started as a small
clinic that run in the back rooms of the church a stone throw away from
the university hospital had grown into a huge medical fair that saw
close to two thousand patients treated within the church premises in
five days. Patients that needed surgical procedures would then be
referred to hospitals where specialists willing to take on those
patients treated them free as a service to the church. It was through
this arrangement that Dr. Karungi saw the small woman that looked older
than her twenty-eight years. The referral note said she had an
incisional hernia -- a previous operation had left a weakness in the
abdominal wall through which some of the abdominal contents would
escape, to remain covered by a layer of superficial tissues and skin.
She asked the woman to show her the hernia. The patient removed three
layers of clothing before carefully unwrapping the fourth and last
layer, a wide band that she had held in place by some safety pins.
Finally, once the band was off, Dr. Karungi saw the woman's bowels
descend to hang like a bag over her pubis. She had seen some ugly
hernias, but this was something to behold. Clearly, there were no
abdominal muscles to hold the abdominal contents in place. No wonder she
was so thin, the poor woman was probably afraid to eat.

'What happened?'

'I had an operation to remove a baby. The doctors said that the uterus
had ruptured and was infected. I was very sick, and they had to remove
the uterus to save my life. The baby was dead. I was in hospital for a
month after that. The wound would not heal. I had three surgeries to try
to close it but it always gave way. My mother heard about the camp and
said I must come. We prayed. I know you will help me.'

'Was that your first pregnancy?'

'No. My second. I have a five year old daughter.'

'Sounds like you are lucky.'

Nankya looked down at the bag of intestines on her lap. 'Lucky? How is
this lucky?'

'Yes. You could have died. You are alive. Your mother still has you.
Your child is not an orphan. You are lucky.''

Nankya held back the tears. The three years since the operation had been
hell. Her husband had left her in hospital once her uterus was removed,
and he never returned to see if she had survived. She had moved back to
her mother's house, where her daughter had been living since before the
operation. She had made numerous visits to different hospitals to try to
find a doctor that would agree to restore her belly to its normal state,
but she had been unsuccessful. One doctor had told her that they would
need an artificial fabric to replace the muscles that were destroyed by
the sepsis. The fabric was expensive, and not all hospitals had it.
Nankya was now waiting to hear if this doctor would have the same story.
She was hopeful though, because her mother had prayed, and told her that
this trip would be different.

'Your God must have heard.' Dr. Karungi said, half laughing. A visiting
professor had left her some mesh, and none of her patients had needed it
so far. This one was definitely going to need a lot of mesh. 'You better
pray that we get theatre space and a patient anesthetist.'

\*\*\*

> > ~***'The situation of maternal health and women's survival in Africa remains  
a cause for concern. You have heard for yourselves from those who have  
spoken before me of the dire situation and plight of Africa's women.  
Here in Uganda, I have spoken on many occasions about the need for  
zero-tolerance of maternal deaths. I know the Government of Uganda is  
doing everything it can, as a nation, to ensure that women do not die in  
pregnancy and childbirth, so needlessly.'***~

> ~*Hon. Janet K. Museveni, M.P., Uganda's First Lady and Minister for  
Karamoja Affairs at the Africa Regional Consultation on Achieving MDG 5  
(Improving maternal health) at Speke Resort Munyonyo, Kampala March 27,  
2012*~

\*\*\*

Kweete's fiftieth birthday would have passed unacknowledged, as had so
many others before it, had she not returned to Mulago during the same
week for her quarterly review. She arrived at the Medical Outpatient
Department to find the doctors and nurses talking about 'Mulago at 50'
celebrations. When she mentioned to the doctor that she was fifty
herself, the doctor good-naturedly wished her a happy birthday, and
added that he hoped she had been cared for better than the hospital. 'If
this building had been a person they would have been long dead from
neglect. Poorly fed, poorly cleaned, rarely dressed, overused, and
ignored when ailing. As for the plumbing and water supply, this hospital
would have had recurrent strokes. It is amazing that it is still here
doing a good job.' The doctor motioned to Kweete to get onto the
examination couch. 'So -- let us see how your fifty-year-old heart is
doing.'

\*\*\*

The Director's office was a hub of activity. The heads of all
departments were meeting over the hospital's fiftieth anniversary
celebrations. Many activities were planned for 'Mulago at Fifty.' There
were the inevitable speeches, a tour of the hospital by some high level
delegation, awards to good performers among the staff, and a party of
sorts. Departments had submitted their wish lists. The Accident &
Emergency Department's list had the usual items -- a new suction
machine, blood pressure machines, new trolleys, and new bed screens. But
the list also contained some ambitious ideas for good measure: a patient
monitor and ventilator. The Head of Department was laughed out of the
meeting.

\*\*\*

# The Tottering Teens {-}

> > ~***The state must be cognizant of the need for the services to be  
maintained. They like to say that the medical profession is a calling,  
but there is no calling without survival. Even a priest in the church  
passes a basket round to collect for his survival. Paul D'Arbela,  
Ugandan professor of cardiology.***~

Kweete's brother Kwesi walked from Mulago to Wandegeya, a short 15
minute walk in the intense sun. The place had changed somewhat since the
last time he was here, some ten years back. The corner gas station was
now under a different name, and the round-about had been replaced by a
complex junction whose lights seemed to be on holiday. The old market
was gone, and in its place was a storied structure that housed a newer
version of the market and a host of newer businesses. Wandegeya still
maintained its seedy look though. The sidewalk was very uneven, there
were open sewers within spitting distance of the many eateries that
characterized the place, and in places where there was no pavement one
had to walk on the road itself and risk being run over by speeding cars.
The low brick barriers meant to separate pedestrian space from motorized
traffic were crumbling. The buildings were a uniform dirty brown from
the dust. On his way to Friendship Pharmacy, which seemed to work as an
extension of Mulago hospital, he weaved his way around fruit sellers
with their fruit piled on the pavement. Passion fruit, sour oranges,
mangoes, giant avocados, tangerines. As he entered the pharmacy, it
occurred to Kwesi that one probably got more health benefits from the
fruit spread out on the ground than from the medications sold inside the
pharmacy.

Friendship pharmacy was doing brisk business. The long window at which
customers presented their prescriptions was staffed by no less than 5
people, presumably all pharmacists - a far cry from the Mulago hospital
pharmacies where a lone pharmacist or dispenser struggled to attend to
the throngs of people waiting for medicines. Kwesi presented the
prescription. The pharmacist informed him that there were three
different brands of the same medicine. 'Which one do you want?'

'How different are they?' he asked.

'We have an Indian brand, a German brand, and one from Israel. Different
prices.' On further inquiry, it turned out the German brand, which the
pharmacist said was the 'original', cost ten times the Indian brand, and
the Israeli one was somewhere in between. The pharmacist assured Kwesi
that the Indian brand was a good one as well, but was quick to add that
most doctors preferred the German one. 'To take no chances...', he
added. Kwesi decided that the Israeli one was probably just as good, and
the pharmacist was happy with his choice.

Buying medicines, especially for treating critically ill patients, was a
dicey affair. Even for a doctor or pharmacist, it seemed that the
transaction was based on trust and not expertise. For the non-medical
the purchase was as good as buying a black box -- one had no clue what
they are buying.

As he walked out of the pharmacy with the medicine package in hand, he
wondered as he had done many times before, why these choices were left
to patients and their relatives. He had once mentioned his concerns to
his cousin Karungi. Instead of allaying his anxiety though, she had made
it worse.

'Yeah', she had said. 'You want the medicine to work, but there is
nothing in the looks of the packaging, or the label, or the shop from
which you buy it, that guarantees you that the medicine is going to do
what the doctor says it should do. In Uganda there is no guarantee that
the medicine in the package matches the name on the package, and in the
indicated strength. Sometimes the only way you find out is by noticing
improvement once the patient starts taking the medicine. But what if
they get worse? Fake medicine? Wrong diagnosis? Disease process too
advanced for the medicine? None of these things are easy to decipher,
especially for the medically naÃ¯ve.

'Medically naÃ¯ve! That is me for sure.' Kwesi had managed to interject,
before Karungi carried on with her ranting. Clearly, this was one of her
peeves with the medical system.

'The counterfeiting industry is alive and well, and the reason there is
a National Drug Authority, in addition to the National Bureau of
Standards, is so that Ugandans do not have to be their own
pharmaceutical watch dogs. Citizens trust that these gate-keeper
agencies will ensure that only safe and effective medicines are sold in
the pharmacies. It is an entirely reasonable expectation that if a
qualified doctor has prescribed some medicine, and it is dispensed by a
licensed pharmacy, that medicine is good for the patient. The reality is
very different. People that can barely read their own language, let
alone English and Latin, are shopping for the prescribed medicines and
medical supplies the same way they shop for clothes. Imported is better,
and if it is cheap that is wonderful. Then there are the usual name
brand shoppers who think the more expensive a commodity is the better.
The prescriptions range from over-the-counter cough syrups to potent
broad-spectrum antibiotics, to steroids, all the way to anti-cancer
drugs that are given only by injection. Patients are shopping for
catheters (specially crafted pieces of tubing used in various medical
procedures), surgical gloves, syringes, surgical sutures, and
specialized wound dressings. To compound the problem, the language on
the medicine or equipment packaging might be Chinese, Dutch, Arabic,
German, or some other language not in use in Uganda. How do these
commodities find their way onto the Ugandan market? They are not sold on
the black market in some back street illegal clinic. They are displayed
on the shelves of clearly sign-posted and brightly lit pharmacies on the
main street, waiting for the first National Drug Authority official that
cares to come in and ask. One has to assume that the government has
approved them for sale and consumption by the uninformed and vulnerable
public.' After that Kwesi never mentioned the medicines issue to Karungi
again.

On his return from the pharmacy he noticed that the lady who had come
the previous night, and who seemed to be doing very poorly in the
morning, had been moved close to the nurses' station. There was an
attempt at privacy - a bed sheet hung on a metal frame that used to be a
hospital screen. The patient still had two intravenous lines, and a tube
running from somewhere under her armpit into a huge bottle on the floor.
Kwesi remembered hearing that she was to be moved to the Intensive Care
Unit. Clearly that had not happened. Maybe there were no ICU beds. It
seemed that a patient had to be literally dying before a bed would be
made available in ICU. No wonder the place had such a dismal reputation.

\*\*\*

Prof. Paul D'Arbela could not resist a visit to the Department of
Medicine. He had spent some of his best years here, first as a young
doctor, and later as a specialist physician and head of department. Â The
exterior did not look any different from what he recalled those many
years ago. But as soon as he walked through the entrance, he knew this
was a very different place. The terrazzo floor was rough and dirty. The
vanish on the doors was peeling. There was a musty smell in the
corridor. He turned right and looked in on the room that was occupied by
the graduate students in his time. It was empty. He knocked on a couple
of doors and was met with silence. Finally, he turned around and made
his way to the corner office that he had occupied as Head. A secretary
sat behind a desk just outside the Head's office. She seemed to be the
only person in the department. 'Is the Head of Department in?'

'No. He has left.'

'Are any of the consultants in?'

'No. You have to come back in the morning.'

D'Arbela walked out. There was a sadness around the place. He knew that
many senior doctors were spending more and more time in their private
clinics. He had heard that grand rounds were no more, and that bedside
teachings were hard to conduct because of the sheer numbers of students,
and the congestion on the wards. Yet he found a deserted department at
3pm on a Monday very disturbing. Had he been in the hospital Senior
Management Meeting a few hours earlier, D'Arbela would have understood
why the once vibrant department resembled a ghost town.

\*\*\*

The Senior Management Meeting ended without much accomplished. The
hospital was cash strapped and the department heads had expected some
relief from the Director's communication. He started by announcing that
the hospital budget had been cut even further. At first, it sounded like
a joke in poor taste, but he assured the meeting that it was true. The
director explained that Mulago was one of the several institutions to be
affected by new budget cuts. Others included the National Medical Stores
and most district hospitals. As they came to learn, part of the money
was to be used to refund some UGX46 billion donor money that was stolen
from the Office of the Prime Minister. The rest was going to finance the
ballooning expenses of State House. Reports from the different
departments were a litany of complaints. The labs had put up a list of
tests that could not be done because there were no reagents. The
pharmacy was rationing intravenous fluids, and the list of drugs that
were out of stock had become longer. The laundry was down to only two
old machines where there should have been eight. The technicians said
they were too old to be repaired. The surgical directorate with the
operating theatres had the most complaints. Operations were being
canceled because of oxygen shortages, inadequate linen, not enough
anesthetists. In the Accident & Emergency patients had had to buy their
own anesthetic drugs in order to get operated in a timely manner. The
shortage of gauze and surgical sutures was perennial and was not
discussed much. The meeting ended with little resolved.

\*\*\*

> Uganda\'s per capita (per person) spending on health amounted to less  
than US\$2 per year for most of the 1980s. In 1989 the government  
allocated more money to social services generally, US\$63 million, equal  
to 26% of its development budget, and US\$24 million of this allocation  
went to health. This represented an increase of 50 percent over health  
spending for the previous year. In subsequent years the actual amounts  
stagnated again, and the share of the national budget going to health  
went down. A big proportion of the health budget continued to be paid by  
donors. In financial year (FY) 2011/2012, donor funding totaled UGX  
206,097,000,000/=. In 2012/13, donor funding increased to UGX  
221,430,553,000/=.

> In 2012 Uganda's major donors cut aid to express their displeasure  
following a multi-million dollar financial scandal in the Office of the  
Prime Minister. Some donors demanded that the stolen money be refunded.  
The government undertook to refund the money rather than recover it from  
the OPM employees who were responsible for the losses. The donor cuts  
and demands from State House for supplementary spending precipitated  
cuts in the budgets of some sectors, key of these health, education,  
agriculture and water. In particular, money meant for the purchase of  
essential medicines, and for running hospitals, was instead diverted to  
State House and Defense. Mulago and regional referral hospitals were  
among the worst hit by the budget cuts.

> > By 2017 the government was contributing only 17% to the healthcare costs  
of citizens. Donors contributed 41% and individuals covered the biggest  
part, 42%. Under the 5-year Health Sector Development Plan (2015/16 -  
2020/21), for government to meet the country's basic health needs, it  
needed to invest Shs3.4 billion into the sector, and to then  
progressively increase to 3.5 billion in FY 2018/19. The government  
would have to spend US\$91 (UGX320,000) per person on health in 2017/18  
and US\$96.6 in 2019/20. Instead, in the FY2017/18, the government  
proposed to spend around US\$10 (Shs34,000) on the health of each of the  
34.6 million Ugandans.

> > ~***The government allocated nearly Shs1.3 trillion, or 6.9% of the total  
budget, to the health sector. The funding would fall far short of the  
Shs100, 000 (US\$28) that government had set as its target health  
expenditure per person in the Health Sector Strategic Investment Plan.  
This target itself fell far short of the WHO recommendation of US\$48  
per person per year. In 2017/2018, amidst health worker strikes for poor  
pay and deplorable working conditions, frequent cholera, meningitis,  
yellow fever, and Ebola epidemics, and a high maternal mortality that  
continued undented, the health share of the budget fell farther to 6.7%.***  
*Sources: National Budget Frame Work Paper 2015, Budget speech  
2015/2016, Annual Health Sector Performance Reports 2015, 2016, 2017,  
The Monitor, May 2, 2013.^[National Budget Frame Work Paper 2015, Budget speech  
2015/2016, Annual Health Sector Performance Reports 2015, 2016, 2017,  
The Monitor, May 2, 2013.]*~

\*\*\*

Karungi walked into the boardroom and found Francis laughing. At first
she thought he was on the phone, but on coming closer realized that he
was not. He seemed to be talking to himself while looking at a copy of
the *Monitor*. He looked up, and by way of explanation said, 'They are
going after the secondaries. They say health workers are corrupt. That
they are stealing drugs and charging patients illegally. Now two nurses
have been arrested at a health center in Mubende district. They were
found selling a few doses of antimalarials to patients at the health
center.'

'And how is that funny?'

'Actually, it is pretty maddening. Think about this.' Now he was
serious. 'A nurse earns UGX 300,000 a month, but even that has not come
for the last three months. She has a family. Her kids need food, school
fees, clothes ... where else can she find money to feed her children,
but in the place where she works? Now the poor women have been arrested,
humiliated, and they are being held at Mubende Police station. Their
kids will starve.' From laughing, he was now shouting angrily. 'And you
know what really gets to me? Last week 2.6 billion shillings went
missing from the Ministry of Health. Nobody has been arrested. That is
why I say, they are going after the secondaries. The primary cancer is
here at the center. It is throwing off metastases. The thieving is being
done right here. From the ministry to the local governments at the
districts, to the hospitals, down to the health centers. I am surprised
that by the time one gets to the health center there is anything left to
steal.' He was banging the desk. 'So -- when we deal with cancers we aim
at the primary. If we can deal with the primary site early, we have a
fighting chance. If we cannot find the primary site, the patient is in
trouble. But here the primary site is pretty obvious. Anyone wanting to
curb this vice need not leave Kampala. Why go to arrest a hungry woman
in Mubende? Why?'

For Francis everything in the hospital and in the country had a parallel
in cancer and its treatment. He had done his thesis on cancer of the
prostate, and so that was the lens through which he saw all the
country's problems. The white board in the PG room was often covered
with his sketches -- it was never clear if he was talking about cancer
of the prostate, or the dysfunction of the health care system, or indeed
the corruption in the entire country. Njega, the oldest Senior House
Officer in the group, was often the sole audience for his ranting.
Njega's response was limited to grunts and nods, and the occasional turn
of the head, but this did not discourage Francis, who would continue to
expound on the inevitable consequences of the rampant corruption -- once
metastases established themselves in the major organs, it was impossible
to kill the tumour cells without destroying the organs, and slowly but
surely, multiple organ failure would set in -- the liver, lungs, brain -
and the end was only a matter of time. He and Karungi once had a
discussion that lasted close to thirty minutes before she realized that
they were not even talking about the same thing. She had come to the PG
room to find Francis working on what looked like an elaborate schema for
the multi-disciplinary care of the cancer patient. At the center of the
board was a red circle with the word 'eradication' in bold. He had
arrows pointing to different medical teams -- surgeons, radiographers,
physiotherapists, nutritionists, and so on. Francis presented the case.

'The diagnosis was first made in 2001. Before that there had been
divided opinion. The 2001 consensus should have been the opportunity for
total excision -- the complete removal of the tumour, at a time when it
was still localised. That opportunity was lost. The next five years saw
the tumour spread rapidly and the progress was largely unchecked. The
spread was typical -- local, regional, and through sending metastases to
far flung organs -- usually by eroding into blood vessels, so that
microscopic bits of the tumour tissue were washed into the blood stream,
and carried all over the body. Once this happened, total excision ceased
to be an option.'

Francis paused and looked at Karungi with a mixture of amusement and
resignation. She was not certain whether he was expounding on the
natural history of malignant tumours, or discussing his pet subject, the
politics of corruption. He went on.

'In 2006 there was a spirited attempt to excise the growth. Sadly, there
was poor preparation for this heroic but ill-advised plan. The patient
had not been prepared for the nature and scope of the surgery. The
tumour had not been 'staged' -- that is; its full extent was not well
appreciated. Other than the primary site, which was obvious, what other
tissues were affected? Was there a clear plane between the tumour and
normal tissue? What was going to be sacrificed during the excision
attempt? What would the team do if the patient bled excessively during
the surgery? How would the pain be controlled? If the excision were
successful, how would the post-operative period be managed? There is
little evidence that all this had been clearly thought through.'

Francis paused again. Njega grunted and carried on flipping through some
book.

'In order to prepare for the extensive surgery, the following should
have been involved, or at least considered: Radiotherapy. It limits the
growth, can effectively shrink the tumour, and make excision possible.
But it leaves healthy tissues damaged, and depresses the patient's
immunity.

Chemotherapy kills tumour cells wherever in the body they are found. But
it kills lots of normal cells as well, and leaves the body's immunity in
tatters. It must be used with caution. Nutrition is key to the patient's
survival. It is made even more so because treatments such as chemo- and
radiotherapy tend to suppress appetite and to reduce the function of the
digestive system. The patient could have used some psychotherapy. There
is little evidence that these modes of treatment were used in
preparation for the 2006 surgery.

The surgical team was determined and well intentioned, but they lacked
the necessary diagnostics. Without these services, the team was groping
in the dark. They needed to know when to start the medications, when to
stop or reduce doses, if they needed to give blood transfusion, and so
many other actions that would have been blind without the diagnostic
services. And all the above needed to be neatly tied together by solid
cancer management -- harnessing the resources, taking care of the
finances, procuring the right medicines, ensuring the right personnel,
and coordinating activities between the OR and other facilities.'

'With most of these missing, the population was shocked that the
treatment failed. The tumour remained firmly in place -- bruised and
bleeding, but not removed. It became clear that to dislodge it
completely was no longer feasible. ...'

Francis would have gone on with his lecture, but just then, Winnie
walked in and asked if anyone had a theatre list onto which she could
sneak a patient the following morning. The conversation changed.

Njega was in his late forties, and had been practicing medicine in some
rural hospital for close to two decades. Nobody knew what got him to
come for post-graduate training after so long. He was familiar with most
of the operations that many residents were trying to master, and always
sounded bored when talking about what he was able to do. Some weekends
he still traveled back to the rural hospital to do a theatre list. He
had been classmates with the Head of Surgery during their undergraduate
years, and the latter was now a professor of surgery. He simply shrugged
his shoulders when asked about the long lapse between his first degree
and his current training.

\*\*\*

The day after the Office of the Prime Minister scandal broke, the board
in PG room bore one bold statement: War on Cancer! Below it in small
letters was the follow up: The worst type of cancer is that which gnaws
at the human soul. In even smaller letters, right at the bottom of the
board was the closing: For this type there shall be no palliation.
Nambasi read it slowly, and would have let it drop had it not been for
Sekabunga, who entered a few moments later. Standing at the door, she
read the statements aloud with the dramatic flair that they were meant
to elicit. 'Well! So, who are the soldiers in this war? The last time I
checked, all of us were the walking wounded!'

'Sounds pretty grim. No palliation ... I wonder why not.'

'The whole point of palliation is that the sufferer should live out the
rest of their days comfortable and free of pain, and that when the time
comes they should go with dignity. Those suffering from the cancer of
the soul should surely die slow, painful, and humiliating deaths.'

'Wow! How so self-righteous!'

\*\*\*

The nurses from surgical emergency went up to Old Mulago and surveyed
the space that was going to be their workspace. At that time in late
2015 they thought it would be for a few months. It was immediately
evident that this was going to be tough. If they had complained about
inadequate space before, now they were going to work with far less. Nine
beds was all there was. The same general areas served as both the
Accident & Emergency, and the surgical emergency ward. The two well-used
patient monitors that had given the High Dependence corner in the A&E a
believable look were now going into storage. The sole ventilator, if it
survived the move, was going to sit in a corner unused, away from the
nurses' station. There were no electricity outlets into which to plug it
close to the nurses' station, as the whole area had only one socket.
There was no provision for piped oxygen, and for that, they were going
to rely on two cylinders for the whole unit. The X-ray unit was farther
up the hill, with several series of steps in between. Patients who could
not walk were going to be wheeled there on their beds, which were not
designed for such a transfer.

The day finally came when the Accident & Emergency department had to be
moved up the hill. It was moved in phases; first some beds, then the
equipment, and finally the patients that remained on the ward.
Everything in the new quarters was improvised, from the narrow sidewalk
that served as an ambulance bay, to the stabilization and treatment
cubicles, created by using curtains to partition the area.

The first full day of working in the new Accident & Emergency space
confirmed everyone's fears. The area was not only very small, but the
infrastructure was grossly inadequate. The patients' beds were crammed
too close together, ignoring the fact that the medical workers needed to
get to the patients. There was no easy way for the workers, patients,
and their many relatives to wash their hands, or anything else, since
there were no sinks. Perhaps most distressing, there was no way to
remove the bodies of patients who died during the night. The best that
the night staff could do was to pull out the bed and push it into a
corner by the door, to await the mortuary attendants who came through in
the morning. On a bad night, the corner would be too narrow for the
mortuary bound beds, leaving some patients lying within a few feet of
their departed neighbors.

\*\*\*

> > ~On December 17, 2015 as the dilapidated New Mulago Hospital was being  
evacuated for renovation, His Highness Prince Karim Aga Khan IV visited  
Uganda as a special guest of President Museveni. In preparation for the  
visit, the President, and especially the then minister for Lands,  
Housing and Urban Development, Daudi Migereko, worked around the clock  
to clear and avail the Aga Khan with 60 acres of prime public land for  
the construction of a new teaching hospital. "*The government undertakes  
to waive payment of any premium for the lease or in any respect for the  
land*," said the agreement. In an agreement that was supposed to remain  
confidential, having been written in State House, the Aga Khan  
Foundation would pay one hundred United States dollars (US\$100) per  
year, a total of \$10,400 (about Shs 34.3 million) to use the land for  
the first 104 years of its lease (\$500 for the first five years and  
\$9,900 for the next 99 years). In addition, the Aga Khan Foundation  
would enjoy "*exemptions of all forms of taxes, and government  
guarantees for foreign loan applications as follows:*~

> > ~*"The government acknowledges and confirms that the not-for-profit  
social development agencies of the Aga Khan Development Network are  
exempt from the payment of all taxes direct and indirect, fees, duties  
and imposts in accordance with the Accords and Protocols of the  
Cooperation for Development in Clause 2 hereof and the Statutory  
Instruments that have been issued by the government of Uganda published  
in the Official Gazette. ...In the event that the Development Covenant  
has not been fulfilled by the expiry of the initial five (5) year term,  
it shall be extended for such further period as may reasonably be  
necessary (having regard to the full context and international best  
practice*)," said the agreement. The government of Uganda, through the  
Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, agreed to  
"*provide letters in support of the project and other education and  
research initiatives in Kampala to international funding agencies and  
institutions to facilitate grants, soft loans and concessional funding  
for the project.*" Additionally, in accordance with the standing rules  
on land allocation within the city, which require the government to  
offer an initial five years that can be extended upon fulfillment of  
initial development requirements, the five-year lease to the Aga Khan is  
supposed to automatically turn into a perpetually- renewable 99-year  
lease. The government was bending over backwards, and clearing every  
possible obstacle in the path so that the Aga Khan could enter the  
market and take free shots in a field where the local investors in  
health care and medical education were shackled with high interest  
loans.~

> > ~On 9 October 2017, during the country's Independence celebrations,  
President Yoweri Museveni awarded His Highness Prince Karim Aga Khan IV,  
the \'Most Excellent Order of Pearl of Africa, The Grandmaster\' to  
recognize his decades of work and contribution to Uganda's development.  
The Aga Khan, a British citizen, is ranked among the top ten wealthiest  
royals in the world.~

\*\*\*

Josephine noticed that the patient reviewed by the Neurosurgeon was
pregnant. The woman had fallen off a *boda boda* and sustained a head
injury. The surgeon ordered for a CT scan, and the relatives left to go
and find the money. By the time they got back the radiographer had left,
so the patient was wheeled back to the ward to wait for the night shift
when another radiographer might be able to do the imaging. By the time
the imaging was done the neurosurgeon was long gone, so the patient was
admitted, to be seen in the morning when both the surgeon and the
imaging results would be available. Nothing was said about the pregnancy
beyond noting that the patient was indeed pregnant, at an estimated 30
weeks' gestation. In the night, the patient became more restless, and
Josephine thought it might be the pregnancy. On closer observation, she
noticed that the now semi-conscious patient was having uterine
contractions, at which point she decided that it was best to get an
obstetric consultation. But the entire obstetric department had been
shifted from Mulago to Kawempe Hospital, a good 3 kilometers away. After
a few frantic calls to see if at least a doctor in Obstetrics could come
and review the patient, and discovering that this was not possible,
Josephine decided that the best solution was to transfer the patient to
Kawempe. But on whose orders? Technically speaking the patient was
between caregivers -- she was admitted in the A&E only as accommodation
to await a neurosurgeon, but now she was clearly in need of an
obstetrician. A couple of hours and several phone calls later, an intern
on call came and wrote the transfer note so that the patient could be
moved to Kawempe, where a Senior House Officer had promised to review
her on arrival. To his credit, the Senior House Officer was waiting. He
examined the patient, prescribed some medication, and instructed that
the patient be returned to Mulago A&E to await the neurosurgeon.

\*\*\*

Okello sat outside the operating theatre in Kawempe pondering his next
move. The theatre was closed following a thunderstorm which ripped part
of the roof off the relatively new building that housed the Department
of Obstetrics and Gynecology. Thankfully, there were no procedures
happening at the time of the storm, but it meant that the theatre would
be unusable until the repairs and were complete. The patient list was
long, and some patients had been waiting for as long as three weeks on
the ward. One woman with a virginal fistula had been waiting for surgery
for months.

Okello recalled a meeting he had attended recently at which Kisamba
Mugerwa, chair of the National Planning Authority, talked of Uganda
attaining middle-income status by 2020. Mugerwa had displayed graphs and
figures that showed Uganda's aspirations, and rosy financial projections
for 2040. Okello wondered if such people ever visited places like
Mulago. 'We are told that Uganda is on its way to achieving
middle-income status. To hear politicians tell it you would think that
it is something that comes about because the President wills it. There
has been minimal increase in productivity, we still export far less than
we import, millions of young people have no jobs, poverty levels are
high and in some districts they are increasing ... we are wantonly
destroying our environment by reclaiming all wetlands and cutting down
forests ... but somehow, almost as though it was by magic, we are still
steadily marching on to middle-income status. I bet you some politicians
think that Museveni is so powerful, he will simply declare Uganda
middle-income and it will be so.'

'Well! You sure needed to get that off your chest!'

'No, really! I am sick of that song,' rebounded Okello. 'Ugandans need
to face the truth; that we are so far down the development ladder that
if there was a category called 'less-than-low-income' that is where we
would belong. The sight of all those obese ministers and MPs laughing at
the president's stale jokes makes my stomach turn. Excuse me.' And with
that he got up and headed down the stairs.

Mugisha was on call, and did not have the luxury of walking away. He had
hoped that he could get some elective procedures done before the
inevitable emergencies in the evening. He was going to find some way of
operating, whether or not the roof was leaking.

\*\*\*

Josephine heard the wails before she saw where they were coming from.
There was nothing unusual about relatives wailing when their patient
died. She turned the corner to enter the Accident & Emergency
Department, and met with the wailing woman. She recognized her from the
previous night when the pregnant patient was returned from Kawempe. The
woman had been waiting for the ambulance, and had told Josephine the
patient was her sister-in-law. '*Musawo! Mwanyinazze afuuse Salongo nga
taleze ku balongo! Wooweee*!' 'My brother is the father of twins, but he
has not had the opportunity to hold the twins in his arms!'

\*\*\*

For a very long time the Radiotherapy Department was little known to
Ugandans, except those unfortunate enough to need it. The building that
housed the department was tucked away in the back of the hospital, its
closest neighbors being the garbage management unit and the workshop.
Those were true back-end operations that should not attract the
attention of the ordinary patient. Except that cancer patients were no
ordinary patients. Most of them had been sick for a long time, and a
good proportion of them were in all likelihood going to die from their
disease -- they were considered terminally ill. This grim view did not
represent the full reality though, as in fact, many cancers were curable
with early diagnosis and appropriate treatment. But in Mulago early
diagnosis and appropriate treatment were more the exception than the
rule.

> > ~***Some solid cancers grow slowly, some grow very rapidly. Some stay in the
same part of the body, but most spread to parts of the body far removed
from where they start. The truly sinister ones are therefore those that
grow and spread very fast. But even the rapidly growing ones usually
have a phase during which they are contained. The barrier might be a
bone, a tissue covering, or a muscle. But if nothing is done, a time
comes when the cancer cells eat their way through the barrier, and then
they are almost unstoppable. Wherever the blood goes, there they will
go. They end up lodged in distant organs, such as the lungs, liver, long
bones, or brain. These organs catch the cells and give them a new home.
Once they establish themselves, they then start to multiply. With time
the effects are apparent. An enlarged liver. Pain in the chest or
abdomen. A cough that does not go away.***~

The Kampala Cancer Registry is the oldest continuously kept such
registry in Africa. It registered its first cases in 1951, and through
all the turmoil and neglect, the registry managed to keep running.
Pathologist Dr. Henry Wabinga, Director of the Registry, was managing to
keep it going through strategic partnerships and sheer tenacity. 'The
registry has not stopped since .... We do not cover the whole country
though. Just the original Kyadondo county.' Wabinga recounted how he
took over as Head. 'Prof. \[Raphael\] Owor called me. He said, 'Wabinga,
I have been taking care of this registry for a long time. It is time for
me to go. You take over.' I did.''

\*\*\*

It was only 7am but the line outside the Radiotherapy Unit was already
long. Many of the patients in the line were from the hostel within the
hospital, but there were a few that came in from outside. The nurses
came early, registered the patients, and retrieved their records. The
doctors and technicians moved back and forth, checking equipment and
ensuring the scheduled patients had all the required tests done and
documented. Then things slowed down. No patients were called. The line
grew longer. There was unease. The talk in the corridor was that there
was a technical problem. The accelerator would not start. This had
happened a few times in the past, but the technicians had always been
able to resolve the problem. By 11am word had gone round that the
'cancer machine' was not working. At noon, the doctors announced that
the day's treatments were not going to happen, but they assured the
patients that the following day they would be able to treat everyone.
The following day the machine did not revive. By the end of the week it
had become official. The old Cobolt 60 radiotherapy machine, which had
served faithfully for decades, had breathed its last - or rather, burnt
its last - leaving thousands of patients with no alternative cancer
treatment. Uganda's population of close to 40 million people, with some
of the highest rates of cancers worldwide, had no access to radiotherapy
within their borders.

> > ~**Broken machines and broken lives. **~

> > ~***The Uganda Cancer Institute is the oldest such facility in East and  
Central Africa. Cancer treatment started as early as 1967 with the  
opening of the Lymphoma Treatment Center by Dr. John Ziegler and his  
colleagues from the USA's National Cancer Institute. For the first two  
and a half decades, the Institute had no radiotherapy service. In 1995  
that changed. Below is the tortuous and often incredible history of this  
cancer treatment service.***~

> > ~***1995: A used Chinese-made Cobalt-60 machine was installed at Mulago  
national referral hospital. It was expected to work for 10 to 12 years  
at most.***~

> > ~***2000: Efforts started to expand radiotherapy services in the country,  
including two more External Beam radiotherapy units at Mulago and more  
centers to be constructed in three regional hospitals.***~

> > ~***2000 -- 2005: No action was taken on the expansion plans because of  
'budgetary constraints', according to Ministries of Finance and Health.***~

> > ~***2002: A major overhaul of the old machine that included a radioactive  
source exchange was done.***~

> > ~***2005: Expansion plans dropped altogether.***~

> > ~***2008: A new plan was hatched to replace the overhauled but already  
malfunctioning Cobalt-60 unit. Consultations into its replacement  
yielded the following options: (a) Instead of buying a new machine and  
source, buy only a new source (of the radiation) and put it in the old  
machine. (b) If a disruption in radiotherapy services can be tolerated,  
purchase a new cobalt machine with its source and install it in the  
existing bunker. (c) Leave the old machine alone. Purchase a new  
Cobalt-60 machine with its new source, and install them in new premises.  
For another two years, none of the options was pursued.***~

> > ~***2010: Mulago hospital administration identified a contractor to  
construct a new bunker, and to procure and install a new Cobalt-60  
machine.***~

> > ~***2011: More consultations (Frederic Johannes Lange) recommended that a  
bunker should be designed and constructed for expansion of radiotherapy  
services. Before anything happened, there was a change in Mulago  
Hospital administration. The new administration terminated the  
procurement process citing procurement irregularities.***~

> > ~***2012 - 2013 the new administration planned relocation of the  
radiotherapy department, and worked in consultation with International  
Atomic Energy Agency on designs for new radiotherapy bunkers (2 EBRT / 1  
HDR and other auxiliary facilities).***~

> > ~***June 2013: Radiotherapy Department put under the Uganda Cancer Institute  
(UCI). The UCI administration noted inaccuracies with the proposed  
bunker designs and halted the procurement and designing processes.***~

> > ~***2014: Uganda Cancer Institute restarted the plan with a much bigger  
projection - (4 EBRT / 2 HDR and other auxiliary facilities).***~

> > ~***March 2016: Old Cobolt-60 machine stopped working and was irreparable.  
Now the entire country had no radiotherapy services. A public outcry  
ensued. The government said it had arranged with Kenyatta Hospital in  
Nairobi for the stranded patients to receive care from there. Hopes were  
dashed when patients wanting to pursue this avenue of care discovered  
that they would have to pay for their own transportation, upkeep while  
in Kenya, and the actual radiotherapy treatment. Few made the trip. The  
majority returned to their villages to await inevitable death.***~

> > ~***2016: construction process started***~

> > ~***December 2017: Radiotherapy services resumed with a new Cobalt-60  
machine installed in the old bunker after 21 months of service  
disruption. The machine effectively restored the Radiotherapy Unit's  
1995 capacity for a population that had doubled since the first  
installation. Prime Minister Dr. Ruhakana Rugunda officiated at the  
commissioning of the sole machine. It was still the only such machine in  
a country of over 41 million people. Elsewhere in the world, including  
in some East African countries, the Cobalt-60 technology was considered  
unacceptable, and had been replaced by the safer and far more effective  
linear accelerator radiotherapy technology.***~

> > ~**Source: **Kavuma Awusi, Senior Medical Physicist & Kigula-Mugambe  
Joseph, Senior Consultant Radiation Oncologist~

\*\*\*

Sheila debated with herself whether to tell her supervisor that she
planned to apply for a job in the Middle East. She had seen the ads on
TV, and heard her colleagues discuss them a few times. She had been a
nurse for fifteen years, and in all that time she had never got a pay
raise, despite having passed her registration exams, and having gained
experience in various disciplines. She had taken every opportunity to
improve her skills, and she now had a raft of certificates from all the
workshops that she attended. She always told herself that one of them
would land her a better paying job, but so far, that had not happened.
Then she saw the ad. Libya was planning to recruit nurses, doctors, and
other medical workers from Uganda. It was said that the pay was very
good - -up to USD1000 per month for a registered nurse. The recruiting
team would take care of all the travel logistics. Sheila had barely
thought of anything else since she decided to apply. It sounded almost
too good to be true. At night she lay awake thinking of all the things
she could do with such money. When she was younger, she had wanted to be
a doctor, and only ended up in nursing school because that year the
university started charging tuition, and her parents could not afford
it. She did not want the same fate for her daughter, who was now in her
final year in secondary school. Yet she knew that on her current salary
even nursing school tuition would be a stretch. Suddenly all that could
change -- if she became one of the nurses selected to go to Libya.

In the end, she decided that it was best not to tell her supervisor of
her plans. If she passed the interview then she would let her know. If
she did not, there was no need to alert her that she was looking for
alternative employment, as that would surely put a nail in any promotion
prospects that might be on the horizon. On the morning of the interview
Sheila chose her clothes carefully, to portray herself as smart but not
flashy; eager but not desperate. A dependable nurse. She had the
originals of her nursing diploma and all her certificates. The large
manila envelope was somewhat clumsy to carry so she put it in a decent
looking plastic bag. Eight o'clock found her waiting with what looked
like half the city outside the hotel where the interviews were to be
held. Many health workers had traveled on night buses from up-country
stations to attend the interviews. At 8.30am when the doors opened there
was a surge towards the doors. The security officers assured everyone
that the recruiters would see everyone who had been invited, and that
they were using a pre-determined list, so one's place in the hall did
not matter. The pushing and shoving eased up a little. As the intense
crowding at the doors loosened up, Shiela's jaw dropped. Right there in
the center of the crowd, brown manila envelope under the arm, and the
usually braided grey hair now held in a tight pitch-black ponytail, was
Sister Bwanika! Her first thought was, 'traitor', but then she quickly
thought, 'why not?' For as long as Shiela had been in nursing, Sister
Bwanika had been a senior nurse, one of those red belt officers that
were more feared than respected. She had recently been rewarded with a
promotion and she now wore a black belt, so in fact she was not Sister
anymore, but Matron. Matron Bwanika was at the rank of Senior Principal
Nursing Officer, SPNO. Every nurse dreamt of becoming an SPNO. It came
with quite a few perks -- for starters, one did not have to do the
actual bedside nursing. This special class of nurses had others under
them that did their bidding. Often they were in charge of entire units,
and in Bwanika's case every nurse in Accident & Emergency reported to
her. She got to attend Senior Management meetings with Consultants and
other senior hospital managers. Surely, nobody in that position would
want to go to Libya! But there was no mistaking it, there was Bwanika,
elbowing her way through the crowd of mostly younger health workers, her
face set, her eyes fixed at the rather distant table where the
recruiters were seated. Sheila was torn between the temptation to walk
over and say good morning, at least acknowledge her in some way, and the
urge to ran out of there and go back to the hospital. How was she going
to explain her presence here, having told Bwanika that she was attending
a teacher-parent conference at her child's school? But the thought of
missing out on this once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to earn a decent
salary, to put her children on a sure footing, to pay for her mother's
diabetes medication without borrowing ... quickly pushed the very
thought of fleeing out of her mind. She had done no wrong; she was going
to take her chances. She would wait in a corner until her number was
called out, and then she would go straight to the front.

\*\*\*

In 2014 Uganda had an estimated 59,000 registered health professionals
forÂ all categories, to meet the health needs of her 34 million people.
The Ministry of Health's human resources structure had 57,050 approved
posts in government facilities, of which 35,900 were filled, leaving a
health worker gap of 21,155. While this meant that for every 100 health
care jobs only 58 were filled, the distribution was far from ideal, with
the majority of the health workers in urban areas despite a much larger
rural population. The country had a ratio of one doctor for every 25,000
people, and one nurse for every 11,000 people. The World Health
Organization recommendation was for one doctor for every 1,000 people,
and one nurse for every 825 people. Uganda was by World Health
Organization standards a country with a severe health workforce crisis.
Not only were the publically employed health workers far too few, but
for the profession they were among the worst paid in the East African
region.

Mid-2014 the Ugandan government, through its Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, received a request from the government of Trinidad and Tobago
for some 263 medical workers to go and work in the Caribbean country, to
help improve the medical services there. An inter-ministerial committee
was formed involving three ministries; Foreign Affairs, Health, and
Gender, Labour, and Social Development. The Ministry of Health, acting
as a recruitment agency for Trinidad & Tobago, put out a call seeking
health workers of various categories to apply for the opportunity to go
and work in Trinidad. More than 700 health workers applied for the
different slots and 283 were shortlisted. Trinidad & Tobago government
officials were scheduled to travel to Uganda in December 2014 to conduct
the final interviews, to ensure that they got the best of the
applicants. While 263 might sound like a small number for a country, the
expatriate positions were not being filled from the large pool of
unemployed and probably inexperienced health workers, but from those in
employment, and in some cases those with teaching responsibilities. The
list of those shortlisted included the following: 15 of Uganda's 91 the
registered Internal Medicine specialists, 4 of the country's 11
registered psychiatrists, 20 of the 28 radiologists, 15 of the 92
pediatricians, 15 of the 126 gynecologists, 15 of the 28 orthopedic
(bone and joint) surgeons, 4 of the 15 pathologists, 4 of the 6
urologists, 4 of the 25 ophthalmologists (eye specialists), and one of
the only three neurosurgeons working at the Mulago National Referral
hospital. Mulago alone was destined to see 93 of its specialist doctors
heading to Trinidad & Tobago. The plans attracted widespread criticism,
a lawsuit, and a petition to Parliament initiated by a number of civil
society organizations, citing government's failure to protect Ugandans'
right to health. Government officials were surprised. They had acted in
good faith, they said, to source employment opportunities for
'unemployed' health workers, who would return with superior skills at
the end of their two-year contracts.

\*\*\*

The house might have been a dignified little bungalow back when Mulago
hospital was started, but that would be several decades ago. The place
was now dingy without apology. For years it had housed the Skin Clinic,
which for a short while became important, or rather notorious, because
of the many ways in which HIV/AIDS affected the skin. Then more
respectable facilities were found, and the skin clinic went back to
being the backwaters of a neglected old Mulago, rather like a sweaty and
bushy armpit.

In 2016 when the Department of Surgery was kicked up the hill from its
old home on the second floor of New Mulago Hospital to make way for the
hospital's renovation, the Skin Clinic became its new home. The surgeons
must have been under the impression that this was a very temporary
address. They did not even bother to put up a decent sign -- although,
how does one hang a decent sign on such obvious indecency? The poorly
written sign, stuck on the side of some old iron sheets by the wall, was
a good match for the structure. Rosalind Nassimbwa, the head of surgical
services, was seated behind a small desk overflowing with papers and
files. Across from her office was what looked like a village primary
school classroom, complete with rickety wooden chairs. This was now what
passed for the surgeons' boardroom. The windows had no glass in them,
and the floor was potholed cement, probably from the fifties. There was
no board, and there was no flipchart. There was no white wall on which
to project anything. How could anyone think progressive thoughts seated
in this place? No wonder the surgeons were staying away from it. The
former occupants of the Surgeons' Boardroom-turned-offices were now
truly homeless.

\*\*\*

The entire stretch of road from the main entrance into the Central
Business District on Jinja road, up to where Kampala road turned into
Bombo road, had been converted into show grounds. This was the annual
Kampala Carnival. The area was only accessible to pedestrian traffic,
with only one exception. Traveling in an open jeep, dressed for the part
complete with floral sunhat, was the Executive Director of the Capital
City Authority, carrying on like an English royal going to the horse
races. Her carriage slowly made its way down the street, giving plenty
of opportunity to the vendors and throngs of carnival revelers to wave
to her, but mostly to stare. At the junction with Yusuf Lule Road the
jeep slowly turned around, and was at that point only a stone throw away
from the open sewers of Nakivubo channel. For a few moments two worlds
that had little in common stood only a short distance apart. The young
men selling flowers by the Mukwano round-about were busy digging up the
muck from the sewer to use as manure for their flowers. For their pains,
each one could only hope to make some twenty thousand shillings on a
good day. If they knew what the carnival was about, they did not care.
In any case the road closures were likely to be bad for the flower
business. The jeep's elegant occupant was pre-occupied by the desire to
modernize the city, and to turn it into a vibrant place to do business.
The carnival was supposed to bring people from all backgrounds out onto
the streets, where they could visit or showcase different types of
businesses, sample street food, listen to local musicians, dance, and
have a grand time.

As the jeep turned by Kitgum House, the Mulago Hospital ambulance
charged down Yusuf Lule Road, intending to cut right across Jinja Road
in order to get to Nsambya Hospital on the eastern side of the city. The
driver brought the vehicle to a screeching stop a few inches shy of the
barrier. The junction was closed. The traffic police officers had not
expected an ambulance. The day was just beginning.

\*\*\*

Francis and Njega were having lunch at the students' canteen, wedged
between Albert Cook Library on the upper side and Davies Lecture Theatre
on the lower side. The place was very busy with both students and
teachers, and the sitting was limited. The place looked very much the
way it had when they were students. Back then, there were just snacks,
and only the well-off students could afford them. Most students simply
hang around and played chess, or had tea, which was more affordable. Now
there were more elaborate meals, and it seemed like many students could
afford them. Outside the canteen were huge campaign posters of the
aspirants to the various University Guild and Medical Students'
association positions. In their time, Francis and Njega could recall
that the medical students had not engaged with campus politics. The
students' association campaigns were a very modest affair in those days.

'From admitting 120 students a year we have suddenly jumped to three
hundred. No extra space, no new arrangements for teaching. So now this
is truly telemedicine. Most students do not hear what is going on by the
bedside, never mind seeing the patient', Francis said in his now
habitually resigned voice. 'It is commonplace to have a class of 30
students in tow on a teaching round. And that's without counting the
intern pharmacists, nurses, and whatever other cadre of health worker
thinks they can learn something from this largely ceremonial exercise.
The greatest asset for a medical student now is a good imagination. They
imagine what the patient looks like, what is wrong with them, what the
teacher is saying -- a pity they are not allowed to imagine stuff for
the exams. But the good old clinical exams are gone too. Not enough
time, not enough space, not enough patients for students to examine. But
there is surely time enough for all that when the students graduate and
become interns. So God help the patients!'

'Do you know the definition of a failed state?'

'No. But I am sure we are living in one. My president was last seen
carrying a sack of cash, distributing it to some village women in
western Uganda. At seventy three, or eighty three, or whatever his real
age is, moving from one fake SACCO[^10] to the next, handing out bags of
cash. After thirty three years in power, this is his idea of eradicating
poverty. Although, truth be told, the President has no interest in
eradicating poverty. Poor people are much easier to manipulate.'

'It sounds like those women have said goodbye to poverty for now,'
chipped in Winnie, who had just joined them uninvited.

'These women have no access to health care. Any of them is a candidate
for a maternal death should they go into labor and fail to deliver in
the banana plantation, as is their practice. If their babies survive
infancy, they are likely to get malnutrition, or to die from a
preventable infectious disease. Some survivors will be found seated
under a mango tree, or in a dilapidated shelter that passes for a
classroom under the failed Universal Primary Education. So -- no, I do
not know the definition of a failed state but I know the state of
failure when I see it. And I can tell you that this is it.'

'You know, it is very difficult for a state to fail. There are too many
interests. It is kept alive, somehow.'

'Which is why, I suppose, they are called failed states, and not dead
states. When a business fails the owners close the door and sell the
remaining assets if they still own some. Countries are messier.'

There was silence as all three surgeons went back to their food. After a
short while Francis started up again.

'Every sector has its rot. There is monumental failure in every sector
in this country. But nowhere is it personalized the way it is in health.
Children are not learning. They drop out of school barely literate. They
become mediocre youths that are unemployed and unemployable. No teacher
writes a school failure certificate. These uneducated and unemployed
people sooner than later die of something their better educated
counterparts managed to avoid. But where do they go to die? In the hands
of a health worker. Some unfortunate doctor signs their name on a death
certificate. The economy is full of holes. Businesses are defaulting on
loans and folding up. Does a government planner sign a death certificate
when a business dies? No. But when it dies, the owner and their family
are in crisis. No housing, no education, no food. They leave the city
and go back to the village. A halfhearted infection walking through the
village latches onto them and they come into the hospital to die. A
doctor writes the death certificate. In reality, such patients are
victims of a dying economy and not the infection. Yet all these deaths
are chalked up to the doctors who are not managing to stop them. But
doctors are scientists and not miracle workers.'

The doctors had had these conversations so many times; it was amazing
that they were still in the profession.

'Museveni is like a man that has lost his way in the desert. He runs
down one false trail after another, from one mirage to the next. He has
been walking in circles for a while now, not wanting to admit that he
lost his way. He knows he has a mess on his hands, but he somehow hopes
that he can fix it. Yet the desert is unforgiving, and the man has only
so much energy, so much reserve. The faster he moves the more lost he
becomes, and the weaker he gets. He begins to slow down from exhaustion
and dehydration. It becomes a race against time, and time wins -- every
time. The vultures begin to circle around. They can smell the fear, and
the meat. So even now, the vultures are beginning to hover over
Museveni. They know it is only a matter of time. He has no chance of
finding his way, or of fixing the mess that he created. When he sinks to
his knees, the vultures will alight.'

\*\*\*

Okello glanced at his cellphone. Ten minutes to 1.00 AM. He was now
resigned to spending all night in the operating room. He had just
finished one emergency C-section. There were three others on the ward,
all hoping to be done in the next few hours at the latest. A 23 year old
woman that had delivered by C-section twice before was in labour.
Ordinarily she should not have been allowed to go into labour, but
should have been scheduled for a C-section as soon as the baby was fully
grown and ready for delivery. She had spent a week at a health center
waiting for the surgery, and had gone into labor while waiting. She was
then transferred to Mulago for lack of an anesthetist at the health
center. The second patient had developed severe eclampsia, a condition
in which a pregnant mother develops uncontrollable high blood pressure
that threatens both the mother and her unborn baby. Left untreated, the
mother usually begins to convulse and often slips into a coma from which
she may not recover. She should have been receiving intensive care, but
the best the ward could do was to move her into a room close to the
nurses' station where they could look in on her more frequently. Even
then, there was really no special attention paid to her. The two nurses
on duty were too busy to monitor her continuously as required. Her only
hope was to get to theatre right away and have the baby taken out,
hopefully still alive. The third emergency was a teen pregnancy that had
made little progress since her labour started several hours before. She
was still stable, and would have to wait. But the real problem now was
that there was no theatre linen. Okello and his team had no sterile
linen to use for the operations. The OR was supplied with enough linen
for four operations at the beginning of the day, and they were now
exhausted. They would have to wait for the linen to be washed and
sterilized. Given the hour, it was unlikely that there was anyone in the
laundry department worrying about Okello and his emergencies. He was
still thinking through his options when the OR door swung open. 'Dr.
Okello, which patient is coming next? You had indicated the patient with
two previous scars but the eclampsia really can't wait. We have failed
to control the convulsions. The fetal heart is erratic ...'

'Neither patient is coming', Okello cut her short. 'No linen.'

'What?! If we lose another patient this week there will be hell to pay.
I am sending the eclampsia patient.' The Sister-in-Charge of Maternity
stood in the door for a short while, then walked out, leaving the doors
to swing closed. 'What am I supposed to do?', Okello shouted at her
receding frame. 'I do not control the Laundry.' It was the third night
this week that operations would not be completed for lack of supplies.
The first time he was not on call, but he had heard that the OR had run
out of oxygen. The second time there had been no linen, and by the time
the linen arrived the anesthetist had left. On both nights there were
maternal deaths.

'Bring the eclampsia patient', Okello called to the theatre attendant
who sat dozing in the corner. Then under his breath, 'We shall have to
operate her without the linen. Better to battle the inevitable infection
than wait for the equally inevitable result if we do not operate.'
Having made that decision, he was suddenly energized. He went to find
the anesthetist who was playing games on his cellphone in recovery room.
'The next patient is on her way. Eclampsia.' The anesthetist, Mr.
Balinda, looked up. 'You got the linen?'

'No. I got a threat from the Sister-in-Charge. We shall just have to
work with no linen. I hope we have enough mops.' Balinda shrugged and
got up. His job was to put the patient to sleep. Let the doctor worry
about the linen. At least tonight he had enough oxygen.

\*\*\*

Turning and turning in the widening gyre

The falcon cannot hear the falconer;

Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold;

Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world,

The blood-dimmed tide is loosed, and everywhere

The ceremony of innocence is drowned;

The best lack all conviction, while the worst

Are full of passionate intensity.

*The second coming*, William Butler Yeats, 1865 - 1939

'Which of you is willing to remain at work while the rest of us go on
strike?'

'There is a strike?' Okello was just coming in from the ward.

'Which hole are you crawling out of? We have had it coming for more than
a week. But it has now been formally declared. Begins tomorrow at
9.00AM. Only skeleton staff to work on emergencies. Of course that means
that we work pretty much as usual, given that we have been doing only
emergencies for a long while anyway. When was the last time any of you
scheduled and actually worked on non-emergency cases?' Mugisha was
usually the best informed of the PG room occupants. He had both feet
firmly plugged into student politics, and though he was an attentive
student who rarely left the hospital, he could be relied upon to know
what was going on beyond the hospital walls.

\*\*\*

The struggle by Ugandan health workers for better pay is as old as the
health service. The first Ugandan (indigenous) health workers to be
employed in the government health system were initially trained as
dressers and assistants. When the training of clinicians started, the
titles and positions remained contentious for decades. In the forties,
the highest position a Ugandan could aspire to was that of African
Assistant Medical Officer (AAMO), which was itself an improvement from
the much detested African Native Medical Assistant. These health workers
constantly agitated for better pay. In 1946 the salary of an AAMO
increased from Â£156 to Â£315 per annum. In 2018 terms the officer would
have earned Â£1,079 per month. The insult of poor pay was made worse by
the glaring inequality between the races -- the Ugandan medical
officer's salary was half that of the white European Nursing Sister. At
that time indigenous Ugandans were by law barred from engaging in
private practice even after retirement. When this legal barrier was
removed in 1949, there was rapid attrition, with doctors leaving poorly
paying government jobs to set up their own private practices. The
government responded by increasing salaries to try and keep doctors in
government employment. In 1951 a medical officer earned the equivalent
of Â£1,059 a month. In 1953 it was raised to Â£1,237, and further to
Â£1,982 in 1954. By 1955 the annual take home was Â£2,873, equivalent to
\-\-- in 2018. Salaries were not the only source of unhappiness. Doctors
especially complained about poor housing, inadequate equipment in
hospitals, inadequate support especially in upcountry stations, and a
lack of recognition and status by the colonial administration. In
subsequent decades the salaries stabilized, until the seventies when all
civil service salaries started to go down. At that time the Director
General of Health Services was the highest paid officer in the entire
civil service, and senior medical consultants were at the same salary
scale as high court judges. Medical workers started to agitate for
better pay, and over the years they threatened, and very occasionally
staged short lived strikes that did not result in better pay or improved
conditions. In 1995 a nationwide sit-down-strike organized by the Uganda
Medical Workers Union paralyzed health facilities for a few days. The
Union's leaders were arrested and imprisoned, and when they were
released they stayed on Police Bond reporting monthly for more than a
year. Salaries were only marginally raised after that strike. By 2004
junior doctors earned a basic salary of UGX506,000 (\$250) per
month.Â Enrolled nurses earned UGX210,000(\$100) while clinical officers
earned UGX350,000 (\$160).Â Health workers' demands that a doctor earn at
least UGX800,000 (\$400), clinical officers UGX700,000 (\$350) and
enrolled nurses UGX350,000 (\$160) were outright rejected and the health
workers threatened with dismissal. Between 2012 and 2018 there were at
least 20 distinct strikes by health workers, the most widespread being
in 2017. Despite the Uganda Medical Association leadership having
followed all the professional procedures required of medical workers
planning industrial action, the Minister of Health declared the strike
illegal, and the President threatened the doctors with arrest, mass
dismissals, and replacement with recruits from Cuba. To make his point,
eight (8) military doctors were deployed to replace the more than \--
striking doctors at Mulago Hospital. Sources: Edward K. Kanyesigye.
Opinion:* *Selective salary reward for health workers: realistic or a
distortion? *Health Policy and Development*; 1 (1): 3-5 UMU Press 2003

\*\*\*

Francis was just leaving the hospital when he got a call from a former
schoolmate. 'Francis, are you at the hospital?'

'No', he lied. 'Why?'

'My nephew is admitted on Orthopedic Ward. He has been there for three
weeks waiting for an emergency operation.' Despite his fatigue and the
anxiety in his friend's voice Francis burst out laughing.

'If he has waited for three weeks it was clearly not an emergency.'

'Well, that is what the doctors said.' Francis was only half listening
as the friend launched into a detailed explanation of the injury that
left the young man lying in the orthopedic ward. The friend only hung up
after Francis promised to look in on him the following day. As soon as
he got off the phone he realized he had left his car a short distance
away from the ward where the young man was. He might as well get this
done and over with, he thought.

Francis walked past the now closed Rodney Belcher Department of
Orthopedics building, round the back to the former Psychiatry wards that
now served as the orthopedic trauma wards. The big sign for 'Bbossa
Mental Health Ward' was still in place at the entrance to the outpatient
clinic that now housed the orthopedic patient clinic. The late Prof.
Bbossa, the first Ugandan psychiatrist after who the building was named,
would have liked the humor in this. Patients with broken bones were
being treated in the mental health ward. He would probably have quipped
that his patients were likely to break your bones, not mend them. Three
beds were lined up in the open along the walkway, and their occupants
looked like they were fresh admissions, evidence that there was no more
space inside the ward. Francis walked past the beds into the ward, and
made his way down the narrow space between patients' beds to get to the
nurses' station. At a few minutes to five in the evening, he knew there
was little chance of finding any staff on duty, but he was in luck. He
spotted a white coat bent over a bed farther down and made a beeline for
it. A clinical officer he knew well was completing a plaster cast on a
child's leg.

'Yes Musumba, how are you doing?'

'Fine, Just leaving...'

'I am looking for a young man that is waiting for theatre. Bosco
Kiganda'

'Oh yes. He is over there', he said, pointing to the far corner. 'He has
a fracture right femur and left tibia fibula. He has been waiting for
money for the implant. The mother says they are getting it tomorrow.'
The two men moved closer to the young man in the corner.

'For three weeks? With no traction?' Francis could see there was only a
flimsy looking string held in place by a crepe bandage, the string held
taut by a small jerrycan of water dangling at the foot of the bed. This
was somebody's idea of traction, clearly grossly inadequate. Applying
traction to the lower end of a broken leg was often a short-term measure
to keep the broken thighbone well aligned, and to keep the muscles from
shrinking before a definitive operation was done to fix the bone ends.
Francis did not need to look at the X-rays. The middle of the thigh
looked like a balloon, and the leg was lying with the foot pointing
outwards, a sign that there was no control at the fracture site. The
crepe bandage and string were purely cosmetic, serving no traction
purpose.

'Yes', Musumba responded. 'We have no equipment to put up proper
traction. When we moved from New Mulago all the traction beams were
discarded, and we were told that these fractures would be operated on an
emergency basis. The traction was said to be old fashioned. But now the
patients are required to buy the implants, and those that do not have
the money have no option but to lie in bed like this. Occasionally we
get donations of implants from visiting surgeons, but they don't last
very long. That is why this ward is so crowded. We cannot operate on the
patients, and we cannot discharge them.' Francis looked around him.
There were patients of all ages, in all manner of postures and
positions. Some had plaster casts on their limbs, some did not. Some
casts were visibly filthy, with dried up blood marking the sites of the
wounds underneath. And open wound here, bloody gauze dressings there. A
catheter running into a urine bag on the floor, empty bottles hanging on
nails by the window. Hardly any space between patients, every patient
with their choice of beddings in every imaginable sanitary state. Two
patients were lying on the floor in the corner, and save for the plastic
sheeting covering the thin mattresses, they had no beddings. One could
smell the toilets from the ward entrance. The chaos on the wards had
become so routine that many doctors did not think much of it, but for
orthopedic patients hoping for a sterile operation this was asking for a
miracle. The bacteria in these wards were spoilt for choice. How many
patients came here with simple fractures and intact skin, and went home
with deadly infections in their bones?

'You should talk to Mr. Sekimpi, sir. He has a theatre list on Thursday.
Maybe if the patient has found money for the implant by then he can be
on the list. Otherwise he will have to wait till after the Easter
holidays,' Musumba said.

Francis thanked the clinical officer and left the ward. He would tell
his friend to forget about Mulago. This was not a hospital where people
came to get better. Those that did get better would have gotten better
in their homes. And truth be told, most patients were worst off for
coming to Mulago, where there was the illusion that some care was being
given. Only the desperate, those with no options, were coming here.
Francis had never actively participated in any industrial action, but he
thought the plans for industrial action beginning the following day
might be a good idea. The young man waiting for operation for three
weeks would have to wait longer, but maybe future patients might get
better services if the strike was successful. As he walked towards the
car he was struck by the irony. The old was discarded as backward and
inefficient. The new was out of reach because of the cost. People like
Kiganda fell through the wide void between the old and the new. The leap
between the one and the other was fraught with many dangers. There in
the crevasses lay ghosts and villains, of misplaced faith, greed, and
ignorance, whether it be surgical equipment, medicine, food, or even
choosing leaders.

Francis got into his car and headed for the Surgeon's Plaza, where he
often earned more from doing one operation than he was paid for a whole
month of working in Mulago.

\*\*\*

In July 2014, shortly after the reading of the budget, the Minister in
Charge of the Presidency laid out how the Presidency[^11] planned to
spend the nearly 1 trillion Uganda shillings allocated to it for the
year. At 6.6% of the national budget, it compared favorably with health
at 7%. The Shs 960.9billion was more than double the amount allocated to
the agricultural sector, which employed about 70 per cent of Uganda's
labour force, and on average contributed about 21 percent to the GDP.

-   Shs 92.6bn to attend 70 planned community functions, and support to
    > the (unspecified) needy.

-   Shs 27.6bn to host 60 delegations from districts.

-   Shs 5.9bn to attend six international trade meetings and to
    > officiate at both local and international trade-related functions.

-   Shs 10.7bn for foreign visits to 20 countries, hosting 15 heads of
    > state and attending 18 regional and international meetings.

-   Shs 53m *monthly* for presidential burial expenses

-   Shs 13.05bn to procure a specialized presidential vehicle at Shs
    > 800m and Shs 5.2bn on buying 32 support vehicles. (In 2012 the
    > President had bought two new limousines, whose cost press reports
    > put variously at between Shs 6bn and Shs 10bn.)

-   Shs 5.3bn to be deposited on a new presidential helicopter. (The
    > President already owned two jets and a helicopter)

-   Shs 3.58bn in wages for the presidential jet and helicopter crews

-   Shs 1.4bn on a poverty alleviation project which included support to
    > one (unspecified) scientific innovator to enhance rural
    > transformation and promotion of value addition.

-   Shs 38.7bn for classified equipment and school fees for unspecified
    > sponsored students.

-   Shs 83.4bn for security (Internal Security Organization (ISO),
    > Co-ordination of Security Services, Uganda Media Centre, and
    > presidential awards chancery)

-   Shs 16.3bn for Ministry of the Presidency. Out of the Shs 16.3bn,
    > the Minister for the Presidency & State Minister each get Shs
    > 18.7m in allowances for mobile phones, Shs 379.5m in per diem and
    > Shs 37.4m in responsibility allowances.

The Shadow Minister for the Presidency in Parliament pointed out that a
reduction by half of the President's 762 handlers could provide enough
funds to recruit at least four doctors for each of the 112 districts.
The handlers took up to Shs 234.3bn annually (93.7 percent) in salaries
of the State House's total allocation of Shs 249.84bn, enough to pay
salaries for 16,271 junior doctors each at a monthly pay of Shs 1.2m.
The same budget could pay at least 12,204 specialist doctors each a
monthly salary of Shs 1.6m and 9,763 consultant doctors each at a
monthly pay of Shs 2m.

The New Mulago renovations were now into their third year. The iron
sheets that had been used to block the view of the hospital building
were aging. All the work had been expected to take less than one year.
Every few months a new date for reopening was named, and each one passed
without any sign of completion. Medical students that had previously
needed only a few minutes to move between wards and the library, or the
morgue, or the lecture theatres depending on the program for the day
were now faced with the monumental task of moving between campuses
several kilometers apart. Even so, everyone seemed to take it in their
stride.

Very close to the top of Mulago Hill more construction was taking place.
The four-storied structure housing the Uganda Cancer Institute shielded
active construction from casual observers. This was phenomenal growth
from its humble beginnings in the ancient looking bungalows farther down
the hill. Dr. Henry Ddungu, one of the Institute's consultants, was
exuberant. 'In the next few years the situation of cancer care will
change. We are putting up a radiotherapy center -- it will perhaps be
the biggest of its kind in Sub-Saharan Africa. The building will
accommodate 4 linear accelerators[^12], in addition to the two Cobalt-60
machines we have right now. We are expanding all the services. We are
putting another 5 levels on this building.' It was hard to not share
Ddungu's enthusiasm, with the construction crew in full view outside his
office window on level 4. He pointed to the construction site. 'Then
there is another building -- a multipurpose structure. It will have
surgical suites, bone marrow transplant suites, lecture rooms, offices
... there will be a whole floor for childhood cancer treatment. We are
changing the face of cancer care in the region. Within country we are
opening up regional centers - Arua is already open. Mbarara and Mbale
are coming up. Once the funding becomes available, these regional
centers will be active. The Kyadondo Cancer Registry is still running,
and we are beginning a registry in Gulu.'

A 2016 Act of Parliament had freed the Cancer Institute from its
historical ties to Mulago -- and by implication, from relying on the
National Medical Stores for its supplies. 'That was a very big victory
for us,' Ddungu affirmed. 'We had suffered under the NMS -- stock-outs,
very expensive purchases, we were not in control of our own budgets.
Many issues were not clear. Right now we have more than 70% of the
medicines we need. We have been able to buy quality products at very
reasonable prices. We are making big savings. Cutting out the middleman
was great.'

To say that 'many issues were not clear' was perfect Uganda-speak. There
had in fact been bitter battles fought between the Cancer Institute and
the National Medical Stores over money and control. It was hard to
imagine a more vulnerable population than the patients that huddled
around the Cancer Institute's over-crowded wards, many from distant
districts, with no relations in Kampala, and therefore entirely
dependent on Mulago for sustenance during the long treatment stays.
Often the family camped on one of the verandas, and the patient could
count on at least one free meal a day. The rest the family had to find,
somehow. They did all they had to do, to be sure that the patient stayed
alive to receive the precious anti-cancer treatment depending on the set
regimen. But with the NMS versus Cancer Institute wars raging, very
often the medicines were out of stock. There might be weeks, or even
months of waiting, of missed doses, of hopes raised and hopes dashed.
Doctors that first admitted patients when they believed they had a
fighting chance to rid the patient of the cancer saw those chances
whittled away by lack of the right medicines. The doctors and nurses had
to put on brave faces, and to continue to reassure the patients that
they were doing all they could to help them. Those with some means would
ask for prescriptions in order to buy the medicines from private
pharmacies. Anti-cancer medicines were not cheap though, and only a
small minority could afford them. Dr. Jackson Oryem, the Institute's
director, had stood before every conceivable committee from the hospital
through to the Ministry and Parliament to plead the case for his
patients. The autonomy had been hard argued and well earned.

\*\*\*

The rumors that had swirled around Makerere University regarding
cheating and other malpractices in student assessment remained largely
unsubstantiated. People talked of 'sex for marks' deals. There was said
to be a racket in some university departments involving the sale of exam
papers, the alteration of marks if a student had failed a paper but had
enough money, or if they were willing to exchange sexual favours for a
better mark than they got in the exams.

A member of faculty at the College of Health Sciences who had tried to
fight the vice said cheating was rampant. 'Students used to come to the
medical school from all corners of the country. Now only a handful of
well-known urban schools are bringing students to the medical school.
Moreover, once they get here, some are assisted to pass. There is a lot
of wasted potential out there in the countryside. Beware which doctor
you go to see. Some should never have been allowed into the school, let
alone to graduate with the Hippocratic oath.' Many people thought the
lecturer was being extreme. Occasionally a whistle blower cried foul,
but proof of the mischief was evasive. In October 2018 that was to
change.

With little warning on a hill that carried seven rumors a day, the
bombshell dropped. Makerere University had fired two members of staff
and demoted two others over what they called gross misconduct, related
to falsifying students' marks, and smuggling names of failed students
onto the graduating roll. The sacked employees were not junior clerks
altering students' exam scripts. The deputy academic registrar of the
College of Health Sciences, Fatuma Nakatudde, and Senior Administrative
Assistant Paul Apunyo, had allegedly managed to hack into the
computerized examinations system and changed the marks of at least two
students. They then got the students' names onto the graduation roll.
The Dean of the School of Health Sciences where the students were
registered, and the Deputy Principal of the College were stripped of
their positions for failing to detect and prevent the fraud. In the
fallout, fifty-nine other students whose presence on the graduation roll
was suspect were taken off the list, and some 14,000 academic
transcripts were held back. The School of Medicine was not implicated
but troubles in the School of Health Sciences were too close for
comfort. Across the institution there was a sigh of relief. It appeared
that sanity was at last being restored. The Ivory Tower's gleam might
have been smudged, but the cleanup was underway.

\*\*\*

For Kweete the long and tiring trip that had started at 5.00 am in
Kanungu was coming to the end. The bus was making its way down Namirembe
Road on the southern end of the city, heading for the bus park in the
heart of Kampala. The vehicle traffic was fairly light but progress was
slow because of the heavy pedestrian traffic. Vendors were literally
hugging the bus, shoving their merchandise at the passengers. Chewing
gum, fake jewelry, shoes, children's books, the Kabaka's portrait
pictures. Muscular men were weaving through traffic with wheelbarrows
full of pineapples and *matoke*, undeterred by the incessant honking.
For many village folk who were unfamiliar with Kampala this was all new
and exciting, perhaps even bewildering. For Kweete this was very
familiar. For the last few years, she had had made this trip at least
three times a year for her review at Mulago hospital's medical
outpatient clinic. Most times she returned on the assigned day, but this
time she was coming a couple of weeks early because she was feeling
unusually tired and she had a cough that she failed to shake off for
close to a month. Sitting on a bus for 10 hours had not helped, and by
the time she got off, she was beginning to feel faint. She had planned
to cross South Street into the Old Taxi Park where she would get a taxi
to Bukoto, but as she stepped off the curb into South Street, she was
suddenly engulfed by a wave of dizziness. She felt the bottom of her
stomach contract violently, and she started retching. She seemed to be
floating rather than walking. As reality merged with illusion, all she
could see was a sea of rainbows. The ground was rushing up to meet her
face. Why were so many cars honking? Were those screeching brakes? Was
that her bad flying away?

\*\*\*

A physician examined Kweete and determined that she had an acute
endomyocarditis -- an inflammation of the heart muscle and its inner
lining. The heart muscle was too weak to pump the blood, first into the
lungs to pick up oxygen, and then into the rest of the body to deliver
the oxygen. With the valves flip-flopping and the muscles working only
halfheartedly, the heart chambers started to flood and the body became
starved of oxygen. Clearly, Kweete's heart problems had not started on
the bus. Her heart had been failing slowly over time, and it had finally
exhausted its reserve capacity.

\*\*\*

The Mulago Super-Specialised Hospital is on the cusp of being opened.
The first part has been the Women's and Newborn Hospital. The Minister
of Health has been categorical -- this is a referral hospital, so the
only way patients will be seen here is through a referral from a lower
level hospital. But the important distinction between the patients being
seen in this hospital and those seen in the rest of Mulago will not be
how ill they are, or that the illness has baffled doctors at lower level
facilities. Important as these factors are, the determining factor will
be the ability to pay. Without health insurance, one must be able to pay
upfront, or one must be 'entitled'. In reality the gate between the old
and the new, between Upper Mulago and the lower super-specialized
facility is guarded by a cashier and not a security guard. So right
here, in the heart of Kampala, is the new apartheid hospital, the
neocolonial version of Entebbe Grade A and Entebbe Grade B. The hospital
has been built using public funds, the government having borrowed the
money from the Islamic and African Development Banks. The health workers
in these hospitals are public servants that draw their remuneration
directly from the public purse. The workforce is largely drawn from the
existing Mulago workforce. The selection process for those who are now
privileged to work in the new facility has been rigorous. Only the best
have made the grade to now work in the new facilities. All the rest will
stay in the old hospital, where everything is Grade B at best. Old and
dilapidated buildings, dysfunctional medical equipment, tired and poorly
motivated medical workers. That will be the fate awaiting anyone who
cannot afford to enter the gates of the super-specialised hospital.

To the medical workers the new hospital is like Paradise. Great
anticipation, but nobody can say for sure what things will be like
there. Everyone's aspirations will be met, even when they seem to
conflict. One doctor has commented that it is like the children's song,
'It's a high road to heaven, none can go up there, but the pure in
heart...' So it is with the new hospital, 'it's a high road to the
super-specialized hospital. None can go up there, but the sure in
pocket.'

Once completed, the facilities have been ring-fenced and put out of
reach of the very people that will pay back those loans. The classic
example of entitlement in Uganda is the Member of Parliament. Members of
Parliament are entitled to the most expensive health care that the
country can offer at tax payers' expense, but for many of them that is
not good enough. They seek medical care abroad and the public purse
picks up the bills. MPs are among the highest paid public employees. In
addition, they do not pay taxes on their allowances. They determine
their own pay. The entitlement to medical care extends to their
immediate families and their parents. Even opposition Members of
Parliament who talk themselves hoarse both in Parliament and on endless
radio talk shows about the plight of Ugandans regarding poor health care
think nothing of taking money out of the public purse to go for medical
care abroad. They are entitled. The poor who lack basic medical
services, and who have no chance of ever setting foot inside the
super-specialized hospital, will through their taxes pay for their MPs
and their accompanying relatives to seek medical treatment abroad. The
entitlement will cover air tickets for the family, hotel bills, meals,
as well as hospital fees.

\*\*\*

In December 2011 a financial performance report prepared for the Office
of the Prime Minister revealed that the government was spending at least
US\$150m (about Shs400b in 2011) on treatment of top government
officials abroad annually. This did not include non-medical costs such
as air tickets, accompanying family or attendants' lodging and upkeep.
The revelation sparked criticism from various circles, and the President
instructed that the responsible ministries look into ways to bring the
costs down. The Ministry of Health responded by disputing the report's
estimates, and instead said that the annual costs were about \$2.2m
(Shs5.8b). Civil society organizations protested the insensitive
hemorrhage of public resources, and argued that the money would be
better spent in upgrading the medical facilities at home. In July 2017,
following the death of a former government minister from advanced cancer
at a private clinic in Kampala, the Speaker of Parliament Honorable
Rebecca Kadaga called for, not improvement of medical facilities at
home, but a faster tracking of approvals for government officers wishing
to go abroad for treatment. She described the existing due process as
frustrating.

\*\*\*

'The government has done a major catch-up job. To dig the country out of
the decades old shortage of hospital beds, they have renovated the old
1200-bed facility, and now it has an astounding 350 beds!' Nambasi, a
second-year graduate student in Surgery was making the commentary in PG
room as he and other colleagues waited to start a tutorial on the
management of femoral fractures.

'What? You are shameless.' Karegyeya and Nambasi rarely agreed on
anything. 'You may not like the government, and God knows it has earned
some of the bad press that it suffers, but you need to give credit where
it is due. The 350 beds are only for the super-specialised hospital. You
should count the 400 beds in the brand new Women and Newborn Hospital,
the 170 bed hospital at Kawempe, and the 200 bed hospital at Kiruddu.'

Nambasi was quick to retort. 'Well, if you do the math you will realize
that all those put together still come short of the original 1200 beds
before the renovation. But if it makes you feel better, we are now back
where we should have been 50 years ago. Most planners look ahead to
project the services that will be needed by future populations. I should
give credit to our hind sighted leaders who are one better. Why rush
ahead? In the next financial year, they might propel us forward. We have
been marking time for the last 50 years.'

'If you are referring to the projections made in the fifties, remember
that many of the health centers and private hospitals that now exist in
the greater Kampala area did not exist then. So we should plan within
the current context, and not use the historical context as you seem to
suggest.'

'You do not tire of defending the indefensible. Private facilities are
inaccessible to the majority of the people who need health care. Some of
the people who go to those facilities can barely afford two meals a day.
They are pushed there by desperation. Patients are selling family assets
to afford a night in the private hospital. The long lines in the
government owned health centers and hospitals should tell you that there
is still a big deficit in services.'

\*\*\*

Mulago foundation stone was laid on 23 Feb 1960 by Frederick Crawford,
then Governor of Uganda. The hospital was opened by H.R.H. Duchess of
York on 16 October 1962. In 2014 the Uganda government commenced
renovation of the hospital. The renovation was commissioned by President
Museveni amidst pomp and ceremony. Funding was secured as a loan from
the African Development Bank, and the renovation was initially expected
to cost US\$59 million, which figure later rose to US\$75 million. Work
was supposed to take 24 months. It experienced several setbacks and
delays, and four years later is yet to be completed.

\*\*\*

Karungi stood in the Heart Institute parking lot pondering the easiest
way to her car, all the way down by the Students' canteen at the medical
school. She had parked there planning to be gone for an hour at most.
She had not intended to spend Independence Day at the hospital. Now it
was several hours, and she hoped the car would be intact. There had been
many instances of vehicles being stripped of lights and mirrors in the
medical school and hospital parking. The shortest route was also the
roughest, but she decided to take chances with it. The path came down by
the old Department of Medical Illustration, leaving the Sickle Cell
Clinic to the right. It was hard to know where the original paved road
had been, if there was ever a paved road. The entire path was one
pothole after another. As she passed by the old Ward 16 she saw a big
sign at the entrance announcing that the ward was now called Jellife
Ward, no doubt after Dr. J.B. Jellife, one of the founding fathers of
pediatrics in Mulago Hospital. The buildings had been given a fresh coat
of paint, so it stood in stark contrast to the ancient and rusty looking
roofs and windows. A rickety looking kiosk stood a short distance away
from the ward entrance, with an equally rickety board announcing that
one could buy airtime and get mobile money services there. Karungi
picked her way gingerly along the uneven path with its loose gravel. The
space between the old animal house-turned-offices and the Department of
Anatomy building was dark but easy enough to maneuver. The narrow
aperture was more a hole in the wall than a proper gate, and it had been
the same way for decades. Stepping through this small gate, she now
faced the Department of Physiology, and had the old PG room to her
right. She had not walked this way at such an hour for years. She
noticed that the light was on. She was going to head straight to her
car, which she could see from this point, but on impulse she decided to
go and see who was in the PG at this hour on a public holiday.

The door was ajar. Karungi pushed it wider open and looked inside. No
one in sight. She was struck by how much the room had changed. The old
sofa in the corner was gone. The side tables were covered with linoleum.
There was far better lighting than she remembered. The chairs were
newer. Only one thing looked exactly the way she remembered it some 20
years previously. The board. Francis' board. She walked over towards it,
aware that she was now trespassing. A laptop was on in the corner where
Njenga used to sit, and the screen saver was playing a random pattern
with colored pipes. She could hear the sound of a flushing toilet
somewhere in the building. There was a piece of chalk by the board.
Following some invisible hand that propelled her on, she picked the
chalk and started to write on the board.

All ye occupants of PG room. Past, present and future. Our mission is
singular. To care for the well, the sick, and the dying. With haste,
respect, and in dignity.

She slipped out without looking back to see if she had been spotted by
whoever was coming out of the bathroom. As she turned the corner she saw
a guard at the corner of the Physiology lab. For some reason she
remembered the incident all those years ago when a guard had been called
to PG room because a hen in the room had caused the doctors to scream
for help. How things had changed. And then again, how things had stayed
the same.

'Makerere, Makerere,Â We build for the future,Â The Great Makerere\
\
Great, Great and Mighty,Â The walls around thee\
Great, Great and Mighty,Â \
The gates beside thee X4  


From East and West,Â From North and South

All voices singing,Â Arise Makerere\
Rise up and rise,Â High up and high\
All voices singing\
Arise Makerere  


Do not forget,Â 

Through all the years

Those who have gone throughÂ the gates of Makerere\
Give them the pride,Â 

Give them the joy\
Oh! To remember,

The gates of Makerere  


Those who here be,Â Seek ye the truth

Build for the future,Â The great Makerere\
Those here have been,Â Those here will be\
Build for the future,Â \
The Great Makerere

[^1]: In addition to legislation, MPs analyse, and pass (approve)
    national budgets, play an oversight role by monitoring government
    (mis)use of funds, represent their constituents' views in
    Parliament, and act as the link between the government and the
    communities they represent.

[^2]: TheÂ Front for National SalvationÂ (FRONASA) was aÂ UgandanÂ rebel
    group formed byÂ Yoweri MuseveniÂ in 1972. It was one of the 28 groups
    represented in a meeting in Moshi, Tanzania between 24 to 26 March
    1979 in what would become known as the Moshi Conference. That
    meeting formed theÂ Uganda National Liberation FrontÂ (UNLF) and its
    military wing the Uganda National Liberation Army (UNLA), to fight
    alongsideÂ Tanzanian forcesÂ against Idi Amin. UNLA and Tanzanian
    forcesÂ in theÂ Uganda--Tanzania WarÂ led to the overthrow of Idi
    Amin\'s regime.

[^3]: Samuel Ikwaras Okware 2015. Three Ebola outbreaks in Uganda:
    2000-2011. Dissertation for the degree philosophiae doctor (PhD) at
    the University of Bergen, Norway.

[^4]: Outbreak of Ebola haemorrhagic fever in Uganda. European Center
    for disease Prevention and Control, Stockholm, Sweden. August 2012

[^5]: F G Omaswa, I Okware, E Kiguli-Malwadde. 2015. Strategies from the
    2000--01 Ebola outbreak in Uganda. African Center for Global Health
    and Social Transformation, Kampala, Uganda.
    www.thelancet.com/lancetgh

[^6]: Matthew C Keller and Peter M Visscher. Genetic variation links
    creativity to psychiatric disorders. *Nat Neurosci*. 2015 July;
    18(7): 928--929. doi:10.1038/nn.4047.

[^7]: It is estimated that between 1450 and the early 19th century, up
    to 28 million Africans were forcibly sold into slavery, and mostly
    sent to the Americas. Britain was the dominant slave trader,
    transporting more than 300,000 Africans a year in chains on
    overcrowded and disease-ridden boats. As many as one in 10 died from
    illness, suicide or starvation. A protracted campaign finally
    persuaded the British Parliament to pass an act abolishing slavery
    in 1807. It was abolished throughout the British Empire in 1833.
    Among those campaigning for the abolition of slave trade were
    African former slaves Oladuah Equiano (c.1745-c.1797)Â and Ignatius
    Sancho (1729-1780). Their contributions have gone largely
    unacknowledged, although they were active in the same time period as
    the better known William Wilberforce (1759-1833), who for 18 years
    annually tabled anti-slavery motions in Parliament. Wilberforce died
    in July 1833. In August 1833 the slave trade was abolished.Â It is
    not known how many people were taken out of the territory that
    became present day Uganda. The year 2007 when Uganda hosted the
    Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) marked the
    bicentenary (200^th)^ anniversary of the abolition of slave trade.
    It was an opportunity for the global community to call upon Britain
    to formally apologize for the role of the British Empire in slave
    trade, and to propose tangible reparations. In Uganda the subject of
    reparations was not on the agenda. The only lasting memory of that
    200^th^ anniversary is that of the massive corruption that
    characterized the procurement of the services related to the
    meeting.

[^8]: The Bible, The Gospel according to John 11:49-50

[^9]: The Bible, John 5: 18; Acts of the Apostles 13:28-30

[^10]: Savings and Credit Cooperative Organisation

[^11]: There were six departments under the presidency: Office of the
    President, Internal Security Organization (ISO), State House, Uganda
    Aids Commission, Directorate of Ethics and Integrity and External
    Security Organization (ESO)

[^12]: Modern radiotherapy equipment


<!--chapter:end:01-main.Rmd-->

`r if (knitr::is_html_output()) '
# References {-}
'`

<!--chapter:end:02-references.Rmd-->

